---
layout: post
title: Unix
date: 2019-10-23
categories: [man]
tags: [operating system]
author: "Max Kossek"
description: List of Unix commands and examples of how they are used.
sitemap:
    lastmod: 2020-05-11
---

NAME
----

Unix - Family of operating systems.


COMMANDS
--------

cd - Change directory.

. - Current directory.

.. - Parent directory.

~ - Home directory.

/ - Root directory.

pwd - Print working directory.


The touch utility changes the modification or access time of a file. It creates a new file if a file with the given name does not exist. The cp utility copies a file from one location to another; mv moves or renames a file; rm removes a file.
```
$ touch file
$ cp file1 file2
$ mv file1 file2
$ rm file
```

The mkdir utility creates a new directory, while rmdir removes an existing directory (if it is empty).
```
$ mkdir dir
$ rmdir dir
```

The ps utility lists all currently running processes. The kill utility kills the process with the specified process ID.
```
$ ps
$ kill 1234
```

The man command opens the manual page for a system command, function, system calls, device or special file, or other type. The history command displays shell's command line input history. The who utility displays a list of currently logged in users.
```
$ man NAME
$ history
$ who
```

The file utility determines the file type of a file. The stat utility displays the file status and metadata associated with a file.
```
$ file FILE
$ stat FILE
```

Special Parameters:

$0	- Parameter 0 (process name).\
$1, $2, ...
	- Parameters 1, 2, and so on.\
$#	- Argument count.\
$-	- Flag parameters.\
$?	- Return value of the previous process.\
$$	- Process number.\
$!	- Process number of the last background command.\
$*	- All argument values.



AWK
---

Pattern scanning and processing.

-F separator
	- Specify field separator.

Find occurrences of word.
```
$ awk 'word' file
```

Print lines longer than 50 characters.
```
$ awk 'length($0) > 50' file
```

Change the delimiter to ",", and print the first, third and last field.
```
$ awk -F, '{print $1, $3, $NF;}' file
```


BC
--

Basic calculator.

Evaluate a basic arithmetic expression.
```
$ echo "2 - 3 * 1" | bc
```

Specify the number of decimal points using scale.
```
$ echo "scale = 10; sqrt(2)" | bc
```


CAT
---

Concatenate and print files.

cat [options] [file ...]

Running cat with no options, makes cat print the file to STDOUT. The ">" operator redirects the output from cat to the specified file or output stream. ">>" appends the output from cat to the file or output stream.
```
$ cat file
$ cat > file
```


CHMOD
-----

Change file access control lists. Permission bits are 3-tuples in the form "rwxrwxrwx" for owner, group, others.

Make file executable for the owner:
```
$ chmod u+x file
```

Make file executable for all groups:
```
$ chmod +x file
```

Clear permission bits:
```
$ chmod ugo= file
```

Give read and write access to the file owner and the file owner's group and execution permission to the owner (rwxrw----). Equivalent to: "$ chmod u=rwx,g=rw,o= file".
```
$ chmod 0760 file
```


CUT
---

Trim out parts of a file.

Print columns 1 and 3 (comma delimited).
```
$ cat FILE | cut -d, -f1,3
```


DIG
---

DNS lookup utility.

dig @server name type

-4		- Use IPv4 only.\
-6 		- Use IPv6 only.\
-b address[#port]
		- Set the source address of the query.\
-p port		- Send query to a non-standard port.\
-q name		- Domain name to query.

```
dig google.com
```



DIFF
----

Compare files.

diff [options] files ...

-i 	- Ignore case.\
-w 	- Ignore whitespace.


FIND
----

Search for file names and properties.

-delete - Delete found files.\
-name pattern
	- Search for a name.\
-print 	- Print files.\
-size size
	- Specify what file sizes to search for.\
-t type	- File type.

Print all the text files in the current directory with size > 1KB.
```
$ find . -size +1k -name '*.txt' -print
```

Find and delete autosaved .txt files inside the /DIR directory.
```
$ find /DIR -name '*.txt~' -delete
```


GREP
----

Pattern search.

grep [options] [file ...]

-c	- Print count.\
-i	- Case-insensitive.\
-l	- Write only the names of matching files to the standard output.\
-R	- Recursively search subdirectories.\
-v	- Invert search.

Diplays lines in which "word" occurs.
```
$ grep "word" file
```


HEXDUMP
-------

ASCII, decimal, hexadecimal, octal dump.

-C	- Hex & ASCII display.\
-x	- Two byte hexadecimal display.

Display the hexadecimal format of a file.
```
$ hexdump -C file
```


IPCONFIG
--------

View and control IP configuration state.

Get the IP address of the current device.
```
$ ipconfig getifaddr en0
```


LS
--

List directory contents.

-1	- Force output to one line at a time.\
-a	- Include hidden files.\
-l	- Long format with file sizes.\
-S	- Sort files by size.


List all .c files in the directory in long format.
```
$ ls -la *.c
```


LSOF
----

List open files.

+D pattern
	- Open files and directories in pattern to complete depth.\
-i	- Internet and network files.

List currently opened internet files.
```
$ lsof -i
```


NC
--

TCP and UDP connections and listens.

-l	- Listen for an incoming connection.\
-u	- UDP mode.

Listen to a port on the localhost.
```
$ nc -l 1234
```

Establish a connection to a port on the localhost.
```
$ nc localhost 1234
```


NETSTAT
-------

Show network status.

netstat


NL
--

Line numbering filter.

Display lines with a line count.
```
$ nl FILE
```


NMAP
----

Network exploration / security and port scanner.

-p range
	- Specify port ranges.\
-v	- Verbose mode.

Scan all ports (0 through 65535) on host.
```
$ nmap -p- host
```


NSLOOKUP
--------

Query internt domain name servers
```
$ nslookup google.com
$ nslookup 127.0.0.1
```


OBJDUMP
-------

Object file dumper.

-d file	- Disassemble the input file.\
-Mintel	- Specify intel syntax.

Disassemble an executable with intel syntax.
```
$ objdump -Mintel -d ./prog
```


OD
--

Octal, hexadecimal, hex, ASCII dump.

od [options] file

-a	- Output named characters.\
-b	- Output octal bytes.\
-c	- Output C-style escaped characters.\
-h	- Output hexadecimal shorts.


PASTE
-----

Align files side-by-side.

-d delimiter
	- Specify a delimiter.\
-s	- Rows instead of columns.

Display the lines of two files side-by-side.
```
$ paste file1 file2
```


REV
---

Reverse lines in a file.

rev [file ...]


RM
--

Remove directory entries.

-d	- Attempt to remove directories as well.\
-r	- Recursive deletion of the file hierarchy.\
-v	- Verbose deletion.

Delete all .txt files:
```
$ rm *.txt
```


SED
---

Stream editor.

Substitute all occurrences of "OLD" with "NEW".
```
$ sed 's/OLD/NEW/'
```

Output the first 10 lines of a file.
```
$ sed 10q FILE
```


SORT
----

Sort lines (defaults to alphabetical sort).

sort [options] file

-f	- Ignore case.\
-k col	- Sort by column (e.g. -k2).\
-n	- Sort numerically.\
-ru	- Reverse sort order.\
-t delimiter
	- Change delimiter (e.g. -t,).\
-u
	- Only sort unique rows.


SSH
---

Remote SSH connection client.

ssh [user@]hostname

-p port	- Specify port number.


STAT
----

Display file status.

stat file


TAIL
----

Access end of a file.

Display the bottom 12 characters of a file:
```
$ tail -c12 FILE
```


TAR
---

Create and manipulate archive files.

tar [options] file


TELNET
------

Interface for TELNET protocol.

telnet host port


TIME
----

Time command execution.
```
$ time ls
$ time grep WORD FILE
```

TOP
---

Current processes and their resource use.

-n nprocs
	- Limit to nprocs.\
-o field
	- Sort by a field (e.g. cpu, time, mem, pid).\
-s delay
	- Set update delay (in seconds).

List the top 10 processes, sorted by memory usage, updated every 5 seconds.
```
$ top -s 5 -n 10 -o mem
```


TR
--

Text manipulation.

-d	- Delete from input.

```
$ echo 'Hello World!' | tr -d l
'Heo World!'
$ echo 'Hello World!' | tr -s l ' '
'He o Wor d!'
$ echo 'Hello World!' | tr "[:lower:]" "[:upper:]"
'HELLO WORLD!'
```


UMASK
-----

File access permission bits.

umask [options]

-S	- Print current file mode creation mask in symbolic form.


UNIQ
----

Unique parts of a file.

uniq [options] [input_file [output_file]]

-c	- Count the number of occurrences.\
-d	- Count duplicate lines.


VIM
---

Text editor.

vim [options] [file ...]

-n	- Create no swap file.\
-p file1 file2 ...
	- Open files in tabs.\
-R file	- Open a file in read-only mode.


WC
--

Word, line, character and line count.

wc [options] [file ...]

-c	- Write the number of bytes to the standard output.\
-l	- Write the number of lines to the standard output.\
-m	- Write the number of characters to the standard output.\
-w	- Write the number of words to the standard output.


XXD
---

Hex dump.

xxd [options] [input_file [output_file]]

-b	- Binary dump.\
-p	- Output in plain continuous hexdump style.\
-r	- Reverse hexdump into a binary.
