---
layout: post
title: C
date: 2019-10-26
categories: [man]
tags: [language, imperative]
author: "Max Kossek"
description: Reference for C programming language syntax.
sitemap:
    lastmod: 2020-06-18
---

NAME
----

C -- General-purpose, procedural programming language.


DESCRIPTION
-----------

Every C program starts its execution at the `main()` function. The "#include" keyword includes the function declarations of a header file. Standard library function names are enclosed in angle brackets "<>" while user-defined headers are enclosed in double quotes (`"`).
```
#include <stdio.h>
#include "test.h"

int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
	return 0;
}
```

Header files with the file extension ".h" are used to define a public interface for ".c" files. Headers should include a header guard using "#ifndef" to prevent duplicate declarations.
```
#ifndef TEST_H
#define TEST_H

int example_func(int, char *);
...

#endif
```

The gcc(1) and clang(1) compilers can be used to compile C files.
```
$ clang -o prog main.c
$ ./prog
```



INPUT / OUTPUT
--------------

The `argc` and `*argv[]` arguments store the number of arguments and the argument vector passed to the `main()` function.
```
if (argc == 2)
	str = argv[1];
```

Include the library `<stdio.h>` for standard input and output functions. The `printf()` function is used to print to STDOUT. The percent character ("%") signals a formatting directive.
```
printf("Float: %3.2f", x);
```

Data type directives for `printf()`:

`%c`
: Char data type.

`%d` or `%i`
: Integer data type.

`%f`
: Floating point number data type. `%3.2f` specifies 3 as the width of the output field and 2 as the number of digits after the decimal point.

`%ld`
: Long integer.

`%p`
: Pointer. Pointers should be cast to `(void *)` before passing it to `printf()`.

`%o`
: Octal.

`%s`
: String data type. Use the dash character ("-") to right-justify text (e.g. `%-10s`).

`%u`
: Unsigned integer data type.

`%x`
: Hexadecimal representation.



The `scanf()` and `getchar()` functions can be used to read input from STDIN.
```
scanf("%d", num);
scanf("%s", str);
char c = getchar();
```

The `fopen()` function is used for file input and output. Modes: "r" = read, "w" = write, "a" = append. Use `fgets()` or `getc()` to read contents from a file. `putc()` writes a single character to a file. The `fprintf()` functions acts like `printf()`, but allows you to specify an output file stream. Always check the return values for system I/O functions.
```
FILE *fopen(char *name, char *mode);

FILE *fr;
if ((fr = fopen("input.txt", "r")) == NULL)
	perror("fopen");
char c = getc(fr);
char *str = fgets(&line, LEN, fr);
ssize_t s = getline(&line, &len, fr);
fclose(fr);

FILE *fw;
if ((fw = fopen("output.txt", "r")) == NULL)
	perror("fopen");
if (putc(int c, FILE *fw) == EOF)
	perror("putc");
fprintf(fw, "Writing to file: %d", x);
fclose(fw);
```


OPERATORS
---------

Arithmetic operators: +, -, *, /, %.
```
x = 2 + 5 * 1;
```

Bitwise Operators: & (AND), | (OR), ^ (XOR), << (left shift), >> (right shift), ~ (one's complement).
```
x = ~y;
z = x & y;
x = y << 2;
```

Relational operators: ==, !=, <=, >=, <, >.
```
i <= 10;
```

Logical Operators: && (AND), || (OR), ! (NOT). C has no Boolean type; `0` indicates "false", every non-zero value indicates "true".
```
i < 10 && c != '\n'
```

Increment and decrement operators: ++, --. i++ reads the variable first and then increments it. ++i increments the value of the variable and then reads it's value.
```
i++;
```

Assignment operators: +=, -=, *=, /=, %=.
```
i += 10;
```


STRINGS
-------

C strings are simply a collection of adjacent `char`s in memory. The '\0' character marks the termination of a string. Loops and assignment statements should check for the terminating '\0' character when modifying strings.
```
char str[10];
char *str = "abc";

for (char *i = str; *i != '\0'; i++) {
	printf("%c", *i);
}
```

The `<string.h>` header file provides a number of useful string functions. The `strchr()` locates the first occurrence of a chararcter in the string, and returns the location. The `strrchr()` is the same as `strchr()`, except that it locates the last occurrence of the character.
```
strchr(buf, '.');
```

The `strlcpy()` and `strlcat()` functions defined in `<string.h>` are designed to be safer alternatives for copying and concatenating strings. Both functions check the size of the buffer to prevent buffer overflows and append the string termination character '\0'.
```
strlcpy(buf, "set to this", sizeof(buf));
strlcat(buf, "add this", sizeof(buf));
```


VARIABLES
---------

Local variables must be declared with a data type. Global variables are declared with the "extern" keyword. The "const" keyword makes a variable immutable.
```
int i;
float f1 = 3.534, f2 = -1.0;
char *c1, *c2;
char *s1 = "Hello World";
char s2[20] = "Two\nlines";

extern int x = 1;
const double e 2.7182;
```

The basic data types in C are: `double`, `char`, `float`, `int`, `long` and `long long`, `short`. All the integer types have an `unsigned` version as well.

Enclosing a data type in parenthesis casts a variable from one type to another.
```
int i1 = 3, i2 = 5;
float f1;
double d1;

f1 = (float)i1 / i2;
d1 = i1 / (double)i2;

printf("%5.2f", (double)5);
printf("%d\n", (int)3.14);
```

The `typedef` construct creates an alias to an existing type. Its use is generally not recommended.
```
typedef int bool;
bool b;
b = 5;


struct person {
	char	*name;
	int	age;
};
typedef struct person person;

struct person p1;
person p2;


typedef struct {
	int x, y;
} point;

point pt;
pt.x = 5;
```



POINTERS
--------

Pointers are variables that point to a memory address. The "&" operator is used to access a variables address. The "*" operator is used to dereference the contents of a pointer. Pointers can point to other pointers.
```
int *p;
int x, y;

x = 3;

p = &x;			// p points to address of x (*p = 3)
*p = 0;			// Same as x = 0, since p is a pointer to x
(*p)++;			// Same as x++. x is now = 1.

y = *p + 5;		// y = 1 + 5 = 6.

printf("%d\n", x);		// Prints "1".
printf("%d\n", *p);		// Prints "1".
printf("%p\n", (void *)p);	// Prints address p is storing.
```

A pointer can be assigned to an element in the array. Pointer arithmetic, such as `++p`, allows you to walk a pointer along an array. Always check for bounds and string termination characters to prevent buffer overflows.
```
*(z+i);
p++;

int *arrptr;

arrptr = arr;
while (arrptr != '\0') {
	printf("%c\n", *arrptr++);
}
```


ARRAYS
------

Arrays can be declared as empty or with explicitly initialized values. Array elements are accessed in the standard away: `arrayname[index]`.
```
int num_array[10];
num_array[0] = 3;
num_array[6] = 4;

int num_array2[] = {1, 2, 3};
int x = num_array2[2];

char char_array[5] = {};

int multi_array[2][3] = {
	{1, 2, 3},
	{4, 5, 6},
};
int y = multi_array[1][0];
```

There are several different ways of iterating over an array, all of which involve either pointer arithemtic or an index.
```
const char *str = "Hello World";

for (char *i = str; *i != '\0'; i++)
	printf("%c", *i);

for (int i = 0; *(str + i) != 0x00; i++)
	printf("%c", *(str + i));

for (int i = 0; str[i] != 0x00; i++)
	printf("%c", str[i]);

for (int i = 0; i < strlen(str); i++)
	printf("%c", str[i]);
```

The `sizeof` function can be used to get the size of a statically allocated array. To do so, divided the size of the array in memory by the size of the data type of the elements in the array.
```
char array[10];

size_t array_size = sizeof(array) / sizeof(array[0]);
```



STRUCTS
-------

Structs are a collection of variables in a single structure. Struct members have to be accessed using the "->" operator if the variable is a pointer to a struct.
```
struct point {
	int x;
	int y;
};

struct point pt;
struct point *pt_ptr;

pt.x = 100;
printf("%d", pt.x);

pt_ptr->x = 50;
(*pt_ptr).y = 20;
printf("%d", pt_ptr->x);
```

It is computationally expensive to pass large structs to functions by value. Passing a pointer to the `struct` is more efficient.
```
int add_fields(struct large_struct *s) { return s->x + s->y; }
```



ENUMS
-----

Enumerations map integers to names in the program. An enumeration is declared using the "enum" keyword. By default, the first element in the enum gets the value 0, the second the value 1, and so on. Most conventions use uppercase names for enumeration identifiers.
```
enum boolean {NO, YES};
enum months {JAN = 1, FEB, DEC = 12};

enum months current = FEB;
printf("%u", current);
```



FUNCTIONS
---------

Every function has to specify its return type, name, and parameters. Functions declarations have the form: `return_type func_name(parameters) { body }`. The `void` type specifies an empty return type or parameter list. The function parameters must have a type and a name. Variables declared inside a function are local to that function. C passes arguments by value by default.
```
int
func_name(int x, int y)
{
	return x + y;
}

void
swap(int *x, int *y)
{
	int temp = *a;
	*a = *b;
	*b = temp;
}
```

Function prototypes have to be declared before the `main()` function or in a ".h" file. Specifying the parameters names is optional. Declaring a function with the "static" keyword restricts its visibility to the current file.
```
int	func_name(int x, int y);
void	swap(int *, int *);
```

C allows you define function pointers and to use them as function parameters. The function pointer must have the same type as the signature of the function. For example, `void (*fn_ptr)(int)` is a function pointer to a function that takes in one `int` parameter and returns `void`.
```
void
usage(void) { printf("usage: ..."); }

int
adder(int x, int y) { return x + y; }

int
accumulate(int (*math_op)(int, int)) { return math_op(5, 2) + 1; }

int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
	void	(*no_argp)(void);
	int	(*two_argp)(int, int);
	int	x;

	no_argp = &usage;
	no_argp();			// Call "usage".

	two_argp = &adder;
	x = two_argp(1, 2);		// Call "adder".

	x = accumulate(two_argp);	// Pass "adder" into accumulate.

	return 0;
}
```



MACROS
------

The #define" keyword can be used to define a function macro or constant. A macro replaces all occurrences of a string with the specified value at compile time. The macro body and parameters should be parenthesized, since C directly substitutes input in to the macro. Macros spanning multiple lines must use the backslash ("\") as a continuation character.
```
#define SIZE 100
#define SQUARE(x)	((x) * (x))
#define ARRAYLEN(x)	(sizeof(x) / sizeof((x)[0]))
#define MAXIMUM(a, b)	(((a) > (b)) ? (a) : (b))
#define BIT(i)		(1 << (i))
#define ADD(a, b)	((a) + (b))

#define ADD_ACC(x, y) do {	\
	x = (x) + (y);		\
	(y) += 1;		\
} while (0)
```



CONDITIONALS
------------

If-else statements can have multiple optional else if blocks.
```
if (x < 0) {
	y = -1;
	return;
}
else if (x > 0)
	y = 1;
else
	y = 0;
```

The ternary expression `cond ? if_true : if_false` is a short-hand for a two-way condition.
```
int y = (x > 0) ? 1 : 0;
```


Switch statements check for different values for a char or int variable. A switch statement continues evaluating all options unless there is a `break` statement.
```
switch (i) {
case 0:
	i = 50;
	break;
case i > 0:
	i += i;
	break;
default:
	break;
}
```


LOOPS
-----

While loops are evaluated until the condition no longer holds. Do-while loops act the same as while loops except that they begin by executing a statement and only then test for a condition.
```
while (i < 0)
	i++;

do {
	i++;
} while (i < 0);
```

For loops have optional initialization, condition and incrementing statements. Multiple statements can be separated by a comma.
```
for (int i = 2, j = 0; i < 10; i++) {
	j += i;
	printf("%d\n", j);
}
```

The "continue" keyword causes a loop to skip to the next iteration. The "break" keyword terminates the innermost loop.



ERRORS
------

Error messages can be written to STDERR using `fprintf()`. The `strerror()` function in `<errno.h>` prints a textual description for an error code. The `perror()` prints the error message associated with the current value of the global `errno` variable.
```
fprintf(stderr, "Can't open %s\n", *argv);
fprintf(stderr, "EFAULT: %s\n", strerror(EFAULT));
perror(NULL);
```

The `err()` and `warn()` family of functions in `<err.h>` displays a formatted error message to the standard output. The `err()` and `warn()` functions use the global variable `errno` to look up the error message. The `errx()` and `warnx()` functions do not append an error message. The `err()` family of functions do not return and exit with code specified in the first argument.
```
err(1, "hostname");
err(EX_NOINPUT, "%s", file_name);
```

The `assert()` macro in `<assert.h>` tests if a given expression is true, and stops the program and prints a diagnostic message if the assertion fails. Compiling a program with the cc(1) option `-DNDEBUG` makes the program ignore the assert macro.
```
assert(x > 0);
```



MEMORY
------

Memory can be dynamically allocated on the heap using `malloc()`. All malloc'd memory has to be explicitly freed by the user by calling `free()`.
```
int *ip = malloc(sizeof(int));
struct Node *temp = malloc(sizeof(struct Node));
free(temp);
```

The `calloc()` function is similar to `malloc()` in that it allocates memory on the heap and returns a pointer to it. The difference is that `calloc()` allocates space contiguously and zeros out the allocated memory. The `realloc()` function takes in a pointer to allocated memory and a new size and tries to change the size of the allocated memory to the new size.
```
size_t size = 50, new_size = 100;
int *ip;

ip = calloc(size, sizeof(int));
ip[30] = 5;

ip = realloc(ip, sizeof(int) * new_size);
if (ip == NULL)
	err(1, "realloc");

ip[78] = 2;

free(ip);
```


Src: [^kernighan] [^summit]

[^kernighan]: Kernighan, B. W., & Ritchie, D. M. (2006). The C programming language.

[^summit]: Summit, S. (1995). C programming FAQs: frequently asked questions. Addison Wesley Longman Publishing Co., Inc..
