---
layout: post
title: Vim
date: 2019-05-05
categories: [man]
tags: [utility, text editor]
author: "Max Kossek"
description: List of essential commands used in the Vim Text Editor.
sitemap:
    lastmod: 2022-10-24
---

NAME
----

Vim -- Programmer's text editor.



DESCRIPTION
-----------

Vim is a text editor and extension of Vi installed by default on most operating systems. Unless otherwise specified, the keys listed below are for command mode. Command mode is the default state. Press the "i" key to enter insert mode. Press the "Esc" key to exit insert mode and go back into command mode.



COMMAND LINE OPTIONS
--------------------

`$ vim -d file1 file2`
: Compare the differences between two files. 

`$ vim -p file1 file2 ...`
: Open multiple files in tabs.

`$ vim -R file`
: Open a file in read-only mode.

`$ vim \`grep -l pattern \*.c\``
: Edit all C files that contain "pattern".



SAVING AND EXITING
------------------

`:w`
: Save file.

`:wq` and `ZZ`
: Save file and quit.

`:q`
: Quit buffer unless changes have been made.

`:q!` and `ZQ`.
: Quit current buffer.

`:qa`
: Exit Vim, unless changes have been made.

`:qa!`
: Always exit Vim.



METACOMMANDS
------------

Most commands can be prefixed by a number to specify the number of repetitions or location of the operation. For example, `3w` moves forward three words.

The `ESC` key cancels most operations.



WRITING
-------

`i`
: Enter insert mode.

`I`
: Enter insert mode at the first non-blank character of the line.

`a`
: Insert after current selection.

`A`
: Insert at the end of the current line.

`o` or `O`
: Enter insert mode in the line below or above.

`.`
: Repeat the previous command.



COPYING AND PASTING
-------------------

Content is yanked using the "y" (yank) key. The "p" (paste) key pastes content in the current register.

What can be yanked: "p" (paragraph), "w" (word), "(" or ")" (parenthesis), "{" or "}" (curly brackets).

`Y` or `yy`
: Yank current line.

`ya<CHAR>` or `yi<CHAR>`
: Yank inside or around CHAR.

`yf<CHAR>` or `yF<CHAR>`
: Yank everything up to, and including the next or previous occurrence of CHAR.

`yt<CHAR>` or `yT<CHAR>`
: Yank up to next or previous occurrence of CHAR.

`y)`
: Yank until end of sentence.

`y0`
: Yank from the start of the line.

`y$`
: Yank until the end of the line.

`p` or `P`
: Paste after and under or before and above current line.

`J`
: Join all selected lines on a single line. Use `gJ` to join lines by removing the new lines, but not replacing it with a whitespace.



REGISTERS
---------

By default, Vim operations store the contents in the default register `"`. To specify a different register, type `"[reg]` before the operation.

Types of registers:
- Last or current operation: `"`.
- Previous operations: `0-9`, contains the content of previous operations.
- Manually specified: `[a-z]`, contains content of operation that followed `"[a-z]`.
- Appending: `[A-Z]`, appends the content of an operation to the lowercase version of the letter.
- Current file name: `%`.
- Last inserted text: `.`.
- Last command: `:`.
- Last search: `/`.
- Discard: `\_`, does not save the operation.

`:registers` and `:reg`
: Show registers and their contents.

`"[a-z]`
: Use register `[a-z]` for the next delete, yank, or put.

`"[A-Z]`
: Append content of next delete, yank, or put to the corresponding lower-case version of the letter.




DELETION
--------

Deletion is performed using the "d" (delete) or "c" (change) keys. The "c" key puts you into insert mode after a deletion.

CHAR examples: "p" (paragraph), "w" (word), "(" or ")" (parenthesis), "{" or "}" (curly brackets).

`x` and `dl`
: Delete the single character under the cursor.

`X` and `dh`
: Delete character to the left of the cursor.

`da<CHAR>` and `di<CHAR>` or `ca[CHAR]` and `cai[CHAR]`
: Delete or change around and inside CHAR.

`df<CHAR>` and `yf<CHAR>` or `dF<CHAR>` and `yF<CHAR>`
: Delete everything up to, and including the next or previous occurrence of CHAR.

`dt<CHAR>` and `ct<CHAR>` or `dT<CHAR>` and `cT<CHAR>`
: Delete up to the next or previous occurrence of CHAR.

`de`
: Delete until the end of the word.

`db` or `dw`
: Delete to the previous word or until the next word.

`daw` or `caw`
: Delete or change from start of current word until next word.

`diw` or `ciw`
: Delete or change current word.

`dis` or `cis`
: Delete or change inside of the sentence.

`das` or `cas`
: Delete or change outside of sentence (includes whitespace and period).

`dd` or `cc` and `S`
: Delete or change the current line.

`dG`
: Delete until the end of the file.

`dgg`
: Delete until the start of the file.

`d)` or `c)`
: Delete or change to the end of the sentence.

`D` and `d$` or `C` and `c$`
: Delete or change to the end of the line.



REPLACING
---------

`r`
: Replace a single character.

`R`
: Enter replace mode (overrides text as you write).



NAVIGATION
----------

`k`
: Move up a line.

`j`
: Move down a line.

`h`
: Move left one character.

`l`
: Move right one character.

`b`
: Move back one word.

`B`
: Move back one white-space separated word.

`w`
: Move forward one word.

`W`
: Move forward one white-space separated word.

`e`
: Move forward to the end of the next word.

`E`
: Move forward to end of the next white-space separated word.

`0`
: Move to the start of the line.

`^`
: Move to the first non-blank character in the line.

`$`
: Move to the end of the line.



STRUCTURE NAVIGATION
--------------------

`{` or `}`
: Forward or back a paragraph.

`(` or `)`
: Forward or back a sentence.

`%`
: Go to the matching parentheses, bracket, or brace.

`[<CHAR>` or `]<CHAR>`
: Forward or back to nearest unmatched parentheses/bracket.

`CTRL-f` or `CTRL-b`
: Page forward or back.

`CTRL-u` or `CTRL-d`
: Scroll down or up half a screen of text.

`CTRL-e` or `CTRL-y`
: Scroll down or up one line at a time.

`zt` or `zz` or `zb`
: Move screen so that current cursor is in the top, middle, or bottom.



FILE NAVIGATION
---------------

`gg` and `1G`
: Go to the first line of the file.

`G` and `100%`
: Go to the last line of the file.

`35G`
: Go to line number 35.

`50%`
: Go to 50% down the file.

`H`
: Move cursor to the first line on the screen.

`M`
: Move cursor to the middle line on the screen.

`L`
: Move cursor to the last line on the screen.

`jj` and `\`'`
: Move cursor to position before jump.

`\`\``
: Move cursor to position of last jump.

`\`"`
: Move cursor to position where you last edited the file.

`\`.`
: Move cursor to position of the last change in this file.



MARKS
-----

Marks are a way to specify locations in a file.

Possible values for `<mark>`:
- Local buffer: `[a-z]`.
- Global buffer: `[A-Z]`.
- Visual selection markers: `<`, `>`.
- Previous operation: `[` (first character), `]` last character`.
- Last jump: `\``.
- Last insert mode: `^`.

`:marks`
: Show active marks.

`:delmarks <mark>` and `:delm <mark>`
: Delete specified mark.

`:delmarks!` and `:delm!`
: Delete all `[a-z]` marks.

`m<mark>`
: Mark position in local buffer (for lowercase letter) or global buffer (for uppercase letters).

`\`<mark>`
: Go to the marked position in the current file (for lowercase letters) or any file (for uppercase letters).

`'<mark>`
: Go to the first non-whitespace character of the marked line.



TEXT NAVIGATION
---------------

`f<CHAR>` or `F<CHAR>`
: Move cursor to the next or previous occurrence of CHAR.

`t<CHAR>` or `T<CHAR>`
: Move cursor before the next or after the previous occurrence of CHAR.

`]s` or `[s`
: Next or previous misspelled word.



VISUAL
------

Enter visual mode using the "v" key. Visual mode is useful for cutting and pasting larger blocks of test.

`v`
: Enter and exit visual selector mode.

`V`
: Enter and exit visual selector mode in line-wise.

`CTRL-v`
: Enter and exit visual selection of a rectangular block of text. Visual block commands: `I` insert at front of line, `A` insert at end of line, `c` delete from column to start of line and go into insert mode, `C` delete from column to end of line and go into insert mode. To execute the visual block commands, follow them with `ESC`.

`gv`
: Reselect last visually selected area.

`o`
: Move cursor to other end of the visual selector, allowing you change range selected from the other side. In rectangular block mode, `o` goes to the other diagonal, while `O` goes to the other corner in the same line.

`:noh`
: Clear search highlighting.



CASING
------

`~`
: Toggle the case of the current character.

`u` or `U`
: Lower- or upper-case the visually selected text.

`gu` or `gU` or `g~`
: Make word lower-case, upper-case, or switch case.

`gugu` or `gUgU` or `g~g~`
: Make line lower-case, upper-case, or switch case.



INDENTATION
-----------

`>>` or `<<`
: Indent or unindent current line based on `shiftwidth` option.

`>` or `<`
: Indent or unindent selected lines based on `shiftwidth` option.

`=`
: Auto-indent line. use `gg=G` to auto-indent all lines.



UNDO / REDO CHANGES
-------------------

`u`
: Undo most recent change.

`CTRL-r`
: Redo most recent change.

`:earlier` or `:later`
: Go back or forward in history.

`:earlier 1f` or `:later 1f`
: Go back or forward to last file write.

`:earlier 10s`
: Go back 10 seconds. Other time modifier abbreviations: `s` seconds, `m` minutes, `d` days.



MACROS / RECORDING
------------------

`q[a-z]q`
: Start recording macro with name `[a-z]` and stop recording with `q`.

`q[A-Z]`
: Append commands to macro in register `[a-z]`.

`@[a-z]`
: Replay macro with register name `[a-z]`.

`@@`
: Replay most recently replayed macro.



FILTERS
-------

Vim allows you to run UNIX commands, through what are known as filters. Use `!` to enter into filter mode, then type a UNIX command, followed by `ENTER` to execute the command on the range.

`!` or `!!`
: Run filter on selected lines or current line. For example, `!!date` inserts the date on the current line.

`:<RANGE>!`
: Run filter on the lines in the specified range.

`!sort`
: Sort selected content.

`!5G`
: Run filter from first line to fifth line. For example, `!5Gsort` sorts lines 1 through 5.

`:0read !date -u`
: Read the date in UTC format into the top of the file.

`:write !wc`
: Write the word count of the current file.



SEARCH
------

Forward-search for words using `/[REGEX]`. To backwards-search, prepend `?`, `?[REGEX]`. Navigate the search results using `n` and `N`.

Prepending the pattern with `?` will execute a backwards-search.

`/[REGEX]`
: Search for a word, pattern, or regular expression.

`/\c[REGEX]` or `/\C[REGEX]`
: Make search case-insensitive or case-sensitive.

`?[REGEX]`
: Backwards search for a word, pattern, or regular expression.

`\*` or `#`
: Search forward or backward for the word under cursor.

`n` or `N`
: Move to the next or previous occurrence of the searched word, depending on whether the search is forward or backward.



SUBSTITUTION
------------

The default pattern for a search and replace is `:[range]s/OLD/NEW/[flag]`, where `[range]` is the lines where the substitution will apply, `OLD` is the old pattern, and `NEW` is the pattern that will replace the `OLD` pattern. You can use a separator other than `/`, for example `:s;old;new;g`.

Flag values:
- `&`: use flags from previous substitution.
- `c`: ask for confirmation.
- `e`: not finding pattern is not an error.
- `g`: global replace--replace all occurrences on each line, not just the first one.
- `i`: case-insensitive.
- `I`: case-sensitive.
- `p`: print last line changed.

`:%s/OLD/NEW/g`
: Replace all occurrences of "OLD" with "NEW".

`:s/\v` or `:s/\V`
: Enabled or disable "very magic" (all regex metacharacters).

`:&&`
: Repeat last substitute.

`:~`
: Repeat the last substitute, with the most recent search pattern.



GLOBAL
------

The global command is similar to the substitution command, but executes a command. The default pattern for a global command is `:[range]g/OLD/[command]`.

`:g/,/norm dd`
: Delete lines containing a comma.



OFFSETS
-------

By default, a search will put your cursor over the matched pattern. Search offsets allow you to specify where to be placed after a search. The meaning of the search offsets change direction when you are using a backward search `?` instead of a forward search `/`.

`/the/2`
: Move two lines down from occurrences of "the".

`/the/b-1`
: Move cursor to one character before the matching pattern.

`/the/e`
: Put the cursor on the last character of the pattern, in this case "e".

`/the/e+1`
: Move character to one character after the last character of pattern.

`/`
: Repeat same search, with the same search offset.

`//`
: Repeat the same search, resetting the search offset.



RANGES
------

Ranges allow you to specify to which lines a command will be applied. The syntax is `:[range]<command>`. For example, `:[range]s/OLD/NEW/g` or `:[range]d`.

These are the values for `[range]`:
- Current line: default or `.`.
- Numerical range: `5` line 5, `1,5` (lines 1 to 5).
- End of file: `5,$` (lines 5 to end).
- All lines: `%` and `1,$` (all lines).
- Backward pattern matching: `?pattern?` matches lines before the current line with regex matching `pattern`).
- Forward pattern matching: `/pattern/` matches lines after the current line with regex matching `pattern`.
- Adding offsets: `/pattern/[+-]5` 5 lines before or after the pattern.
- Marks: `'t,'b` (from mark `t` to mark `b`).
- Visual mode selection: `'<,'>` (where `'<` is the start of the visual selector, and `'>` is the end of the visual selector).



OPTIONS
-------

To reset an option value, append it with an appersand, for example: `:set nowrap&`.

`:set`
: Show all modified options.

`:set {option}`
: Set Boolean option.

`:set no{option}`
: Reset boolean option.

`:set {option}={value}`
: Set string or number option.

`:set {option}+={value}`
: Append value to string option.

`:set {option}-={value}`
: Remove value to string option.

`:set {option}?`
: See value of option.

`:set {option}&`
: Reset option to its default value.

`:options`
: View available options.



OPTION EXAMPLES
---------------

`:syntax on` and `:syntax enable`
: Turn on syntax highlighting.

`:set syntax=LANG`
: Set syntax highlighting to LANG.

`:set nu` or `:set number`
: Turn line numbering on.

`:set nonu` or `set nonumber`
: Turn line numbering off.

`:set hlsearch` and `:set hls` or `:set nohlsearch` and `:set nohls`
: Turn on or off search highlighting.

`:nohlsearch` and `:nohls` and `:noh`
: Remove search highlighting.

`:set incsearch`
: Turn on incremental searching.

`:set colorcolumn` or `:set cc`
: Turn on colored column (:set cc= to turn off).

`:set noexpandtab`
: Make Vim use tabs instead of spaces.

`:%retab!`
: Convert spaces to tabs in the whole file.

`:set textwidth=80`
: Set length of line to maximum of 80 characters.

`:set ignorecase` or `:set noignorecase`
: Make search case-insensitive or case-sensitive.



FOLDING
-------

Folding allows you to hide and show lines in a file. Folded sections can be nested.

`zn` or `zN`
: Enabled or disable folding.

`zi`
: Toggle between enabled and disabled folding.

`zf`
: Fold current selected text.

`zo`
: Reopen folded section.

`zc`
: Close fold again.

`zr`
: Open all folds.

`zm`
: Close all folds.

`zR`
: Open all levels of nested folds.

`zM`
: Close all levels of nested folds.



SPELLING AND ABBREVIATIONS
--------------------------

Adding an `i` before the abbreviate makes the appreviation only apply to insert mode. Adding a `c` before the abbreviate makes the appreviation only apply to command-line mode. For example, `:iabbrev ad advertisement` and `:iab ad advertisement` would set an abbreviation that is only active in insert mode.

`:abbreviate teh the`
: Set abbreviation.

`:abbreviate`
: List current abbreviations.

`:unabbreviate teh`
: Remove abbreviation.

`:abclear`
: Clear all abbreviations.

`:set spell [lang]`
: Turn on spell checking (`:set nospell` to turn off).

`z=`
: View list of alternative of spellings.


SPECIAL CHARACTERS
------------------

`CTRL-v <digit>`
: Insert ASCII character based on digit 0-255 (such as `9`, `009`) or hexadecimal (such as `x7f`).

`CTRL-k <digraph>`
: Insert digraph. For example, `CTRL-k Co` inserts the copyright symbol.

`:digraphs`
: List available digraphs, like Co.

`:digraph a" ae`
: Define new digraph.



NUMBERS
-------

`CTRL-a` or `CTRL-x`.
: Add or subtract one to the selected numbers. Prefixing the command will increase the count. For example, `5 CTRL-a` will add five to each number.

`g CTRL-a` or `g CTRL-x`
: In a range of lines, increase or decrease each first number in a line by one.



TABS / FILE MANAGEMENT
----------------------

`:tabe [file]`
: Open a file in a new tab.

`:gt / :tabn` or `:gT / :tabp`
: Go to next tab or previous in the buffer.

`:tabm [index]`
: Move the current tab to the specified index.



OTHER COMMANDS
--------------

`/[^\x00-\x7F]`
: Search for non-ASCII characters.

`:put =range(0,10)`
: Insert 10 lines each containing an incremented number from 0 up to 10.

`:sort` and `:sort!`
: Sort and inverse sort lines. Options: `f` (floating-point number sort), `i` (case-insensitive sort), `n` (numerical sort).

`:his`
: View history of past commands.
