---
layout: post
title: Python
date: 2020-03-26
categories: [usage]
tags: [programming language]
author: "Max Kossek"
description: Personal reference for the Python scripting language.
sitemap:
    lastmod: 2020-05-10
---

NAME
====

Python - Interpreted, high-level, general-purpose programming language.



DESCRIPTION
===========

Typing "python" in a shell invokes the Python command interpreter. Python scripts have a ".py" file extension and can be run with the python command.
```
$ python
python>

$ python file.py
```

Libraries are imported at the top of a file using the "import" keyword. Modules and packages can be imported from within nested file structures.
```
import sys
import test.x
import test.sub

for arg in sys.argv:
	print(arg)
```

Python comments start with the hash character ("#").



INPUT / OUTPUT
==============

The print() function is the standard output function. The input() function is the standard input function.
```
print(3 + 5)
print("Hello World")
print("Number = %d") % num

x = input()
age = int(input("Enter your age: "))
```

Formatted string literals are strings beginning with a "f" or "F". Python expression can then be placed between the "{" and "}" characters.
```
> x = 5
> y = 5
> str = "hello"
> f"{str} {x + y}!"
'hello 10!'
> print(f"{math.pi:.3f}")
3.142
> print(f"{0.01:5}")
 0.01
```

The repr() and str() functions convert any value to a string. The str() function returns a human-readable representation, while repr() returns a representation that can be read by the interpreter.

The str.format() method passes its objects into the brackets of the string. This method supports both positional and keyword arguments.
```
> print("Hello {}!".format("World"))
Hello World!
> print("{2} {1} {0}".format("c", "b", "a"))
a b c
> print("{first} {second}".format(second = "b", first = "a"))
a b
> x = 5
> print("x^2 = {}; x^3 = {}".format(x * x, x * x * x))
x^2 = 25; x^3 = 125
```

The "%" operator can be used for string formatting.
```
> print("Pi = %5.3f" % math.pi)
Pi = 3.142
```

Files can be read and written using the open(filename, mode) function. The open() function returns a file object. The filename argument is a string containing the filename. The mode argument is one of: "r" (read), "w" (write), "a" (append), or "r+" (read & write). The mode argument defaults to "r". Appending "b" to the mode argument opens the file in binary mode, so that the file can be read and written in terms of byte objects. The "with" keyword guarantees that a file is properly closed after its suite finishes. Files that weren't handled using the "with" keyword should be explicitly closed using close() to free up system resources.
```
> with open("file.txt", "r") as f:
...	content = f.readlines()
> f.closed
True

> f = open("file.txt")
> f.closed
False
> f.close()
```

The f.read(size) method reads some quantity of data and returns it as a string or bytes object. If the end of the file is reached, f.read() will return the empty string (""). The f.readline() method reads a single line from a file. Calling list(f) or f.readlines() returns all the lines of a file inside a list.

The f.write(string) function writes the contents of string to the file, returning the number of characters written. Calling f.tell() returns the file object's current position in the file. The f.seek(offset, whence) method can be used to change a file object's position.



OPERATORS
=========

Arithmetic Operators: +, -, *, / (float division), // (int division), % (modulo), ** (exponentiation).
```
> 2 ++ 5
25
> 5 / 2
2.5
> 5 // 2
2
```

Comparison operators: <, <=, >, >=, ==, !=, is, is not. Assignments inside expression must use the walrus operator (":="), to avoid confusion between typing "=" and "==".
```
if x == 2
x is 2
if str <= "Hello World":
```

Boolean operators: and, or, not. The "not" operator has the highest priority, followed by "and", and then "or". Evaluation stops as soon as the outcome of the Boolean operation can be determined.
```
x or y
not True
```

Membership and Identity operators: in, not in.
```
if 5 not in array
```

Identity operators: is, is not.
```
x is y
```

Bitwise operators: |, ^, &, <<, >>.
```
x ^ y
> 0b101 & 0b111
5
> 8 << 2
32
```


TYPES
=====

Built-in types:
- Boolean: bool (True, False).
- Numeric types: int (2, 4, 20); float (5.0, 1.6), complex.
- Sequence types: list, tuple, range.
- Text sequence types: str ("hello", '5"').
- Binary sequence types: bytes, bytearray, memoryview.
- Set types: set, frozenset.
- Mapping types: dict.

The type() function returns the type of an object.
```
> type(False)
<class 'bool'>
> type(3.14)
<class 'float'>
```



STRINGS
=======

Python strings are immutable. In order to modify a string, a new string has to be created. Strings can be concatenated with the "+" operator, and repeated with "*".
```
> str = "hello"
> str * 3
'hellohellohello'
> str += " world"
> str
'hello world'
```

Strings can be indexed, with the first character having index 0. Substrings are accessed using the square brackets "[]" surrounding an optional start and end index. The len() function returns the length of a string. The count() function counts the number of occurrences of a character in a string. The index() function returns the index of the first occurrence of a pattern in a string.
```
> str[0]
'h'
> str[2:]
'llo world'
> str[0:5]
'hello'
> str[::-1]
'dlrow olleh'

> len(str)
> str.count("l")
> str.index("w")
```

The replace() function replaces a pattern in the string. Calling upper() on a string converts it to uppercase. The split() function splits a string into an array based on a separating character.
```
> str.replace("llo", "y")
'hey world'
> str.upper()
'HELLO WORLD'
> str.split(" ")
['hello', 'world']
```


VARIABLES
=========

Python variables do not have to be declared. Additionally, their data type is inferred implicitly. The "del" statement deletes a variable.
```
> x = 0
> x = "Hello World"
> del x
```



LISTS
=====

The "del" statement can be used to delete an element or slice from a list. The "in" and "not in" comparison operators test whether a sequence contains a value.

The "list" data type consists of an ordered set of elements, each assigned an index. The list type has a number of built-in methods: append(x), extend(iterable), insert(i, x), remove(x), pop([i]), clear(), index(x[, start[, end]]), count(x), sort(key=None, reverse=False), reverse(), copy().
```
> num = ["a", "b", "c", "a"]
> num[0]
'a'
> num.count("a")
2
> num.index("a", 1)
3
> num.reverse()
> num
['a', 'c', 'b', 'a']
> num.append("d")
['a', 'c', 'b', 'a', 'd']
> del num[4]
['a', 'c', 'b', 'a']
> "d" in num
False
```

Lists can be nested.
```
> matrix = [[1, 2, 3], [4, 5, 6], [7, 8, 9]]
> matrix[1][1]
5
```

Lists can be used as a stack, by using the append() and pop() functions. The "collections.deque" class is an efficient implementation of the queue data structure.
```
> stack = [1, 2, 3]
> stack.append(4)
> stack.pop()
4
> stack.pop()
3
```

List comprehensions are a precise way of creating lists. A list comprehension consists of brackets containing an expression followed by a "for" clause, and zero or more "for" or "if" clauses.
```
> [(x, y) for x in [1,2,3] for y in [1,2,3] if x != y]
[(1, 2), (1, 3), (2, 1), (2, 3), (3, 1), (3, 2)]
```

The "tuple" data type is a collection of immutable, comma-separated values. It is not possible to assign to individual items of a tuple. Tuples are commonly used for heterogeneous sequences of elements.
```
> t = True, 1, "hello"
> t[2]
'hello'
> u = t, (2, 3, False)
> u
((True, 1, 'hello'), (2, 3, False))
> empty = ()
> singleton = "hello",
```

The "set" data type consists of unordered collections of elements. Sets are commonly used when easy membership testing and elimination of duplicate entries is required. Sets support the following mathematical operations: union ("&"), intersection ("|"), difference ("-"), and symmetric difference ("^"). The add() function adds an element to the set; remove() removes an element. The update() function adds the specified elements to the set.
```
a = set("0123")
b = set("012345")
> b | a
{'0', '5', '2', '4', '3', '1'}
> b - a
{'4', '5'}
> a & b
{'0', '3', '1', '2'}
> a ^ b
{'4', '5'}
> a.add("5")
> a.remove("0")
> a.update(["10", "11"])
> a
{'10', '5', '2', '11', '3', '1'}
```

The "dict" (dictionary) data type consists of a set of key-value pairs. Dictionaries are indexed by keys, which can be any immutable type (strings, numbers). The keys in a dictionary must be unique.
```
> months = {"jan": 1, "feb": 2, "mar": 3}
> months["apr"] = 4
> months["jan"]
1
> del months["jan"]
> "jan" in months
False
```

When looping through dictionaries, the key and corresponding value can be retrieved using the items() method. When looping through a sequence, the position index and value can be retrieved using the enumerate() method. The reversed() function returns a reverse iterator. The sorted() method returns a new sorted list from an iterable list.
```
> for k, v in months.items():
...	print(k, v)
feb 2
mar 3
apr 4

> for i, v in enumerate(["a", "b", "c"]):
...	print(i, v)
0 a
1 b
2 c

> sorted(["a", "d", "b", "c"])
['a', 'b', 'c', 'd']
```



FUNCTIONS
=========

Functions are defined using the "def" keyword. The first statement of the function body can be an optional string literal, called the docstring, which provides documentation for the function. Arguments without a "return" statement return a value called "None".
```
def func(x,y):
	"""Compute the sum of two numbers."""
	return x + y
```

Python functions can support a variable number of arguments. All variable assignments in a function are stored in a local symbol table. Arguments are passed using call by value.
```
def power(base, exponent = 2):
	print(base ** exponent)

> power(2)
4
> power(2, 3)
8
```

Keyword arguments allow the caller to specify the arguments name.
```
def power(base = 5, exponent = 2):
	print(base ** exponent)

> power(base = 2)
4
> power(exponent = 2)
25
```

Restrictions can be placed on the way arguments have to be passed to a function. The first function places no restriction on the way arguments may be passed. The second function only allow positional parameters ("pos_arg(arg=1)" would generate an error). The third function only allows keyword arguments ("kwd_arg(3)" would generate an error"). For an API, only positional parameters should be used to prevent the API from breaking if the parameter's name are modified in the future.
```
def std_arg(arg):
	print(arg)
def pos_arg(arg, /):
	print(arg)
def kwd_arg(*, arg):
	print(arg)
```

Variadic arguments of the form "*args" collect all remaining input arguments passed to a function. Variadic arguments are normally placed last in the list of formal parameters. A final formal parameter of the form "**name" receives a dictionary containing all keyword arguments except for those passed to the formal parameters.
```
def concat(*args, sep = "/"):
	return sep.join(args)

> concat("earth", "mars", "venus")
'earth/mars/venus'
> concat("1", "2", "3")
'1/2/3'
> concat("1", "2", "3", sep=".")
'1.2.3'

def args(*arguments, **keyword):
	for arg in arguments:
		print(arg)
	for kw in keywords:
		print(kw, ":", keywords[kw])

> args("hello", "world", name="admin", password="****")
hello
world
name : admin
password : ****
```

The "lambda" keyword creates a small anonymous function. Lambda functions are syntactically restricted to a single expression.
```
lambda a, b: a + b
```



CONDITIONALS
============

If statements use the "if", "elif", and "else" keywords. There can be multiple optional "elif" conditions, as well as a single optional "else" condition. Statements have no parentheses, and must be properly indented.
```
if expr:
	body
elif expr:
	body
else:
	body
```



LOOPS
=====

For loops use the "for" keyword. In Python, the for statement iterates over the items of any sequence in the order that they appear. Python for loops do not define an iteration step and halting step like in C.
```
array = ["a", "ba", "c"]
for i in sorted(array):
	print(i)
```

The built-in range() function returns an iterable objects. It can be used to iterate over a sequence of numbers. The first argument specifies the start or end index, the second argument the end index, and the third argument the step value.
```
for x in range(10, 100, 3):
	sum += x

for i in range(5):
	print(i)
```

While loops use the "while" keyword. While loops are evaluated until a condition no longer holds.
```
while x > 0:
	x -= 1
	print(x)
```

A "break" statement breaks out of the innermost enclosing for or while loop. The "continue" statement causes a loop to skip to its next iteration.

A "pass" statement does nothing. Pass can be used when a statement is required syntactically but the program requires no action, or as a place-holder for a function or conditional body.
```
if x < 0:
	pass
else:
	print(x)

class EmptyClass:
	pass
```



ITERATION
=========

The iter() function returns an iterator object of the called object. The iterator object defines the method __next__() which accesses elements one at a time. A "StopIteration" exception is raised when there are no more elements.
```
> s = "abc"
> it = iter(s)
> it
<str_iterator object at 0x10a74e080>
> next(it)
'a'
> next(it)
'b'
> next(it)
'c'
> next(it)
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
StopIteration
```

A user-defined class can support iteration by defining an __iter__() method which returns an object with a __next__() method. Generators are another way to create iterators. Generators are written like regular functions, but use the "yield" statement when returning data. Generators automatically create the __iter__() and __next__() methods. Generators also automatically save the local variables and execution state between calls.
```
def reverse(data):
	for index in range(len(data)-1, -1, -1):
		yield data[index]

> for char in reverse("abc"):
...	print(char)
...
c
b
a
```



MODULES
=======

A module is a file containing Python definitions and statements that can be reused and imported into other modules. Within a module, the module's name is available as the global variable "__name__". Modules are imported using the "import" command. The "from" variant of the import statement, only imports the specified names from the module: "from math import sqrt". The wildcard operator ("*") import all names that a module defines, except those beginning with an underscore ("_"). The use of "*" in import statements is generally not recommended.
```
> import math
> math.sqrt(25)
5
> math.__name__
'math'
> from random import random as rand
> rand()
0.6632754986479283
```

Functions from a module can be assigned to a local name. Each module has its own private symbol table. A module's global variables can be accessed similar to its functions, "modname.itemname".
```
> sin = math.sin
> sin(0)
0.0
> print(math.pi)
3.141592653589793
```

Packages are a way of structuring Python's module namespace by using dotted module names of the form: "package.submodule". A directory structure might look like the example below. The "__init__.py" files are required to make Python treat the subdirectories as packages. The "__init__.py" file can be empty, execute initialization code, or set the "__all__" variable. Defining a list named "__all__" in a package's "__init__.py" file tells Python to take the list as the list of names to be imported when "from package import *" is executed. Users of the package can then import individual modules using "import sound.effects.echo" or "from sound.effects import echo". Relative imports using "." and ".." are based on the name of the current module (e.g. "from .. import module_name").
```
sound/
	__init__.py
	formats/
		__init__.py
		wav.py
		aiff.py
		au.py
	effects/
		__init__.py
		echo.py
		reverse.py
	filters/
		__init__.py
		equalizer.py
```

Running a Python module using "python module.py <arguments>" executes the code in the module and binds the "__name__" variable to "__main__". Including the following line at the end of the module can make the file usable as both a script or an importable module. If the module is imported, then the code inside the if-statement is not run.
```
if __name__ == "__main__":
	import sys
	func(int(sys.argv[1]))
```

Python comes with a library of standard modules (html, json, math, numbers, os, statistics, sys, etc.). The dir() function returns a list of names a module defines. Without an argument, dir() lists the names defined in the current session.
```
> x = 5
> dir()
['__annotations__', '__builtins__', '__doc__', '__loader__', '__name__', '__package__', '__spec__', 'x']
> import numbers
> dir(numbers)
['ABCMeta', 'Complex', 'Integral', 'Number', 'Rational', 'Real', '__all__', '__builtins__', '__cached__', '__doc__', '__file__', '__loader__', '__name__', '__package__', '__spec__', 'abstractmethod']
```



CLASSES
=======

Classes are a way to bundle data and functionality together. Creating a new class creates a new type of object, allowing new instances of that type to be made. Each class instance keeps track of its attributes to maintain state.

A namespace is a mapping from names to objects. There is no relation between names in different namespaces. Namespaces have different lifetimes. The global namespace exists for the duration of the program's execution. The local namespace for a function is created when the function is called, and deleted when the function returns.

The scope is the region of a program where a namespace is directly accessible. The "nonlocal" statement causes the listed identifiers to refer to previously bound variables in the nearest enclosing scope excluding globals. The "global" statement causes the listed identifiers to be interpreted as globals.

The set of attributes of an object form a namespace. References to names in modules are attribute references ("modname.funcname"). Attributes may be read-only or writable. Assignment and deletion is only possible when the attribute is writable.

Classes are defined using the "class" keyword. Class objects support two operations: attribute references and instantiation. Attribute references use the standard syntax "obj.name". Valid attribute names are all the names that were in the class's namespace when the class object was instantiated. Class attributes can be assigned to.
```
class Calc:
	x = 100
	def add(x, y):
		return x + y

> Calc.x
100
> Calc.x = 500
> Calc.add(5, 2)
7
```

Class instantiation uses the function notation. Executing "x = ClassName()", creates a new instance of the class and assigns the object to the local variable x. The special method "__init__()" sets the initial state of an instantiated object. A class instantiation automatically invokes __init__().
```
class Counter:
	x = 0
	y = 10
	def __init__(self, start_index, end_index):
		self.x = start_index
		self.y = end_index

> Counter.x
0
> obj = Counter(5, 50)
> obj.x
5
```

A method is a function that belongs to an object. With methods, the instance object is passed as the first argument of the function. Calling "x.func()" is equivalent to "Class.func(x)". It is convention to call the first argument of a method "self". Methods may call other methods by using attributes of the self argument.
```
class Bag:
	def __init__(self):
		self.data = []

	def add(self, x):
		self.data.append(x)

	def addtwice(self, x):
		self.add(x)
		self.add(x)

> x = Bag()
> x.addtwice(3)
> x.data
[3, 3]
```

Python classes support inheritance using the notation: "class DerivedClassName(modname.BaseClassName):". Multiple inheritance is supported using the following notation: "class DerivedClassName(Base1, Base2, Base3):". Calling DerivedClassName() creates a new instance of the class. Derived classes may override methods of their base classes. Attributes inherited from a parent class are searched depth-first and left-to-right.

Python does not support private instance variables. However, by convention names prefixed with an underscore ("_name") are treated as a non-public part of the API.



ERRORS & ERROR HANDLING
=======================

Syntax errors are errors detected during parsing. Exceptions are errors detected during execution. Python prints the exception type of a built-in exception if it occurs.

The "try" statement consists of a try and except clause. First, the try clause is executed. If no exception occurs, then the execution of the try statement is finished. If an exception occurs during execution of the try clause, the rest of the clause is skipped, the matching exception clause is executed, and the program is continued at the try clause. If an exception occurs that does not match the except clause, then it is passed to outer try statements, or left unhandled. A try statement can have more than one except clause to handle different exceptions. The last except clause may omit exception names to serve as a wildcard. The "try" statement may have an optional else clause, that must follow all except clauses. It also has another optional "finally" clause that is executed under all circumstances.
```
> while True:
...	try:
...		x = int(input("Enter a number: "))
...		break
...	except ValueError:
...		print("Error: Invalid number")
...	except (RuntimeError, TypeError, NameError):
...		pass
...	except:
...		print("Unexpected error")
...	else:
...		print("No errors")
...	finally:
...		print("Always executes")

> Enter a number: a
Error: Invalid number
> Enter a number: 3
```

The "raise" statement allows the programmer to force a specified exception to occur. The argument to raise indicates the exception to be raised.
```
> raise NameError
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
NameError
```


VIRTUAL ENVIRONMENTS
====================

A virtual environment is a self-contained directory tree that contains a Python installation for a particular version of Python plus additional packages. The "venv" module creates and manages a virtual environment. The virtual environment can then be activated using the source built-in.
```
$ python3 -m venv tutorial-env
$ source tutorial-env/bin/activate
(tutorial-env) $ python
Python 3.5.1 (default, May  6 2016, 10:59:36)
>
```

The "pip" program is used to install, upgrade, and remove packages. Calling "$ pip install package" installs a package. The "$ pip uninstall" command removes a package. The "$ pip list" command returns a list of the packages installed in the virtual environment.



STYLE CONVENTIONS
=================

- Use 4 space indentation, and no tabs.
- Wrap lines so that they don't exceed 79 characters.
- Use spaces around operators and after commas, but not directly inside bracketing constructs: "a = f(1, 2) + g(3, 4)".
- Use "UpperCamelCase" for class names and "lowercase_with_underscores" for function and method names.
- Always use "self" as the name for the first method argument.
