---
layout: post
title: SQL
date: 2020-06-07
categories: [man]
tags: [language, declarative]
author: "Max Kossek"
description: Reference for the SQL declarative programming language.
sitemap:
    lastmod: 2020-06-07
---

NAME
----

SQL -- Structured query language for relational databases.



DESCRIPTION
-----------

SQL is a language used for querying and modifying data in relational database management systems. Relational databases organize information into tables, consisting of rows (the records) and columns (the values associated a record).

SQL queries are case-insensitive. A semicolon (";") signals the end of a SQL statement.



OPERATORS
---------

The asterisk ("`*`") operator select all columns.
```
SELECT * FROM customer;
```

The double vertical bar operator ("`||`") stands for concatenation.
```
SELECT first_name || ' ' || last_name FROM customer;
```

The `LIKE` operator queries data using pattern matching.
```
string LIKE pattern;

'abc' LIKE 'abc';	true
'abc' LIKE 'a%';	true
'abc' LIKE '_b_';	true
'abc' LIKE 'c';		false

SELECT * FROM customer WHERE first_name LIKE 'a%';
```



COMMANDS
--------

`ALTER TABLE` changes the definition of an existing table.
```
ALTER TABLE name action
ALTER TABLE name RENAME column TO new_column
ALTER TABLE name RENAME TO new_name
ALTER TABLE name SET SCHEMA new_schema

ALTER TABLE distributors ADD COLUMN address varchar(30);
ALTER TABLE distributors DROP COLUMN address RESTRICT;
ALTER TABLE distributors RENAME COLUMN address TO city;
```

`CREATE` creates a new database.
```
> CREATE DATABASE name;
```

`CREATE TABLE` defines a new table by specifying the columns and their associated data types. The primary key is a special unique index that cannot be NULL. It is efficient to select on the primary because it is used as an index.
```
CREATE TABLE database_name.table_name (
	column1 <data type> PRIMARY KEY,
	column2 <data type>,
	column3 <data type>
);

CREATE TABLE films (
    code        char(5) CONSTRAINT firstkey PRIMARY KEY,
    title       varchar(40) NOT NULL,
    did         integer NOT NULL,
    date_prod   date,
    kind        varchar(10),
    len         interval hour to minute
);
```

`DELETE` deletes rows of a table. Deletes rows that satisfy the `WHERE` clause from the specified table. By default, `DELETE` will delete rows in the specified tbale and all child tables. Use the `ONLY` clause if you with to delete only from the specific table mentioned. If the `WHERE` clause is absent, the effect is to delete all rows in the table.
```
DELETE FROM table_name
WHERE column1 = value1 AND column2 = column2...;

DELETE FROM films WHERE kind <> 'Musical';
DELETE FROM films;
```

`DROP` removes a table or database. To empty a table of rows without destroying the table, use `DELETE` or `TRUNCATE`.
```
DROP TABLE table_name;
DROP TABLE films, distributors;

DROP DATABASE database_name;
```

`INSERT` creates new rows in a table. Any column not specified in the first clause will receive the default value. If the column clause is ommitted, then the assumption is that all columns will be provided in the INSERT statement.
```
INSERT INTO table_name (column1, column2, ...)
VALUES (value1_1, valu1_2), (value2_1, value2_2), ...;

INSERT INTO films VALUES
    ('UA502', 'Bananas', 105, '1971-07-13', 'Comedy', '82 minutes');

INSERT INTO films (code, title, did, date_prod, kind)
    VALUES ('T_601', 'Yojimbo', 106, '1961-06-16', 'Drama');
```

`ORDER BY` sorts the output of a query. The "ASC" option is set by default.
```
SELECT
	column_1,
	column_2
FROM
	table_name
ORDER BY
	column_1 [ASC | DESC],
	column_2 [ASC | DESC];

SELECT first_name, last_name FROM customer ORDER BY last_name DESC;
SELECT first_name, last_name FROM customer ORDER BY first_name, last_name DESC;
```

`SELECT` retrieves rows from a table or view. It has the following clauses: DISTINCT (remove duplicate rows), ORDER BY, WHERE, LIMIT or FETCH, GROUP BY, HAVING, INNER JOIN, LEFT JOIN, FULL OUTER JOIN, CROSS JOIN, UNION, INTERSECT, EXCEPT.
```
SELECT
	column1, column2, ...
FROM
	table1, table2, ...
WHERE
	condition1 AND condition2 ...;

SELECT * FROM customer;
SELECT first_name FROM customer;
SELECT first_name, last_name, email FROM customer;

SELECT 5 * 3 AS result;
SELECT * FROM customer LIMIT 10;
```

`SHOW` lists the available databases.
```
SHOW DATABASES;
```

`TRUNCATE` empties a table or set of tables. `TRUNCATE` is much faster than `DELETE`, because it doesn't scan the tables.
```
TRUNCATE TABLE table_name;
```

`UPDATE` updates the rows of a table. Changes the values of the specified columns in all rows that satisfy the condition. Only the columns to be modified need to be mentioned in the `SET` clause.
```
UPDATE table_name
SET column1 = value1, column2 = value2, ...
WHERE key = value;

UPDATE films SET kind = 'Dramatic' WHERE kind = 'Drama';

UPDATE weather SET temp_lo = temp_lo+1, temp_hi = temp_lo+15, prcp = DEFAULT
  WHERE city = 'San Francisco' AND date = '2003-07-03';
```

`USE` switches to a database.
```
USE database_name;
```



CLAUSES
-------

`DISTINCT` - Removes duplicate rows from a result set.
```
SELECT
  DISTINCT column_1, column_2, ...
FROM
  table_name;

SELECT DISTINCT bcolor, fcolor
FROM colors;
```

`GROUP BY` - Divide output into groups of rows that match one or more values. Condenses into a single row all selected rows that share the same values for the grouped expressions.
```
GROUP BY expression [, ...]
```

`HAVING` - Eliminates groups of rows that do not satisfy the condition. Only return rows where aggregate values meet the specified conditions. `HAVING` filters group rows created by `GROUP BY`. `HAVING` introduces a condition on aggregations, while `WHERE` introduces a condition on individual rows.
```
HAVING condition
```

`JOIN` - Combine columns from one or more tables. There are five types of `JOIN`: `INNER`, `LEFT OUTER`, `RIGHT OUTER`, `FULL OUTER`, and `CROSS`.

`CROSS JOIN` - Returns the Cartesian product of rows from tables in the join. It combines each row from the first table with each row from the second table.
```
SELECT *
FROM employee
CROSS JOIN department;

SELECT *
FROM employee, department;
```

`INNER JOIN` - Requires each row in the two joined tables to have matching column values. Creates a new table by combining the column values of two tables. The results is the outcome of first taking the Cartesian product and then returning all rows that satisfy the join predicate. NULL values will never appear in a `INNER JOIN` table, since NULL never matches any other values, unless the condition first checks that the joined columns are NOT NULL before applying the operation.
```
SELECT employee.LastName, employee.DepartmentID, department.DepartmentName
FROM employee
INNER JOIN department ON
employee.DepartmentID = department.DepartmentID;

SELECT *
FROM employee, department
WHERE employee.DepartmentID = department.DepartmentID;
```

`OUTER JOIN` - The joined table retains each row, even if no other matching row exists.

`LEFT OUTER JOIN` - Always contains all rows for the "left" (A) table, even if the join condition does not find any matching row in the "right" (B) table. If the `ON` clause matches 0 rows in B, the join will still return a row in the result, but with NULL in each column from B.
```
SELECT *
FROM employee
LEFT OUTER JOIN department ON employee.DepartmentID = department.DepartmentID;
```

`RIGHT OUTER JOIN` - Like the `LEFT OUTER JOIN` except with the treatment of the tables reversed. Every row from the "right" (B) table will appear in the table at least once.
```
SELECT *
FROM employee RIGHT OUTER JOIN department
  ON employee.DepartmentID = department.DepartmentID;
```

`FULL OUTER JOIN` - Resulting set will have NULL values for every column of the table that lacks a matching row.
```
SELECT *
FROM employee FULL OUTER JOIN department
  ON employee.DepartmentID = department.DepartmentID;
```

`WHERE` - Only affect the rows that meet the specified criteria. Uses the `condition` to filter the rows returned from a `SELECT` statement. Comparison operators: =, >, <, >=, <=, <>, !=, AND, OR.
```
SELECT select_list FROM table_name WHERE condition;

SELECT first_name FROM customer WHERE first_name = 'John' AND last_name = 'Doe';
```



SET OPERATIONS
--------------

The results of two queries can be combined using the set operations union, intersection, and difference.

`EXCEPT` returns all rows that are in the result of query1 but not in the result of query2 ("NOT"). The `EXCEPT ALL` operator does not remove duplicates.
```
query1 EXCEPT [ALL] query2
```

`INTERSECT` returns all rows that are both in the result of query1 and in the result of query2 ("AND"). The `INTERSECT` operator removes duplicate rows from the final result set. The `INTERSECT ALL` operator does not remove duplicate rows from the final result set.
```
query1 INTERSECT [ALL] query2
```

`UNION` appends the result of query2 to the result of query1, removing any duplicate results ("OR"). The two queries must result in the same number of columns and compatible data types in order to unite. Any duplicate records are automatically removed unless `UNION ALL` is used.
```
query1 UNION [ALL] query2
```



AGGREGATE FUNCTIONS
-------------------

Aggregate functions compute a single result from a set of input values.

`avg(expression)`
: The average of all non-null inputs values.

`bool_and(expression)`
: True if all input values are true, else false.

`bool_or(expression)`
: True if at least one input value is true, else false.

`count(*)`
: Number of input rows.

`count(expression)`
: Number of input rows for which expression is not null.

`every(expression)`
: True if all input values are true. Equivalent to `bool_and()`.

`max(expression)`
: Maximum value of expression across all non-null input values.

`min(expression)`
: Minimum value of expression across all non-null input values.

`string_agg(expression, delimiter)`
: Non-null input values concatenated into a string, separated by a delimiter.

`sum(expression)`
: Sum of expression across all non-null input values.


Examples of aggregate function uses:
```
SELECT "total customer names", COUNT(name) FROM customers;
SELECT "average order cost", AVG(cost) FROM orders;

SELECT class, MAX(grade)
FROM grades
GROUP BY class;
```



FUNCTIONS
---------

The `LENGTH()` function accepts one string and returns the length of that string.
```
LENGTH(string);

SELECT LENGTH ('Hello World');
SELECT LENGTH (first_name) len FROM customer ORDER BY len;
```

The `CURRENT_DATE()` function returns the current date.
```
SELECT CURRENT_DATE();
```
