---
layout: post
title: x86 Assembly
date: 2020-03-22
categories: [man]
tags: [programming language]
author: "Max Kossek"
description: Reference for the x86 assembly language.
sitemap:
    lastmod: 2020-05-17
---

NAME
----

x86 - Assembly language for the Intel x86 architecture.


DESCRIPTION
-----------

Human written assembly source code files usually have a ".S" extension. The gcc and clang compilers can be used to compile the source code into an executable. The -S option compiles a C source code file into an assembly file. Setting the -masm=intel option makes clang generate output in Intel syntax.
```
$ gcc -o file file.S
$ clang -S -masm=intel file.c
```

Assembly files are split up into sections. The `.text` section stores the program code, `.data` is for initialized data and the `.bss` section is for uninitialized data. Static data regions are declared in a separate section labeled `.DATA`.

Labels are used to mark functions and sections of code. Programs start executing at the `_main` or `start` label.
```
_main:
	push	rbp
	...
loop:
	add	rax, rax
	...
```

AT&T syntax instructions have the order: source, destination. In AT&T syntax, "%" denotes a register, and "$" denotes an immediate value.
```
mov	$5, %rax
movl	mem_location(%ebx,%ecx,4), %eax
```

Adding the line `.intel_syntax noprefix` specifies Intel, rather than AT&T syntax. Intel syntax instructions have the order: destination, source.
```
.intel_syntax noprefix
mov	rax, 0
mov	eax, [ebx + ecx*4 + mem_location]
```


REGISTERS
---------

Registers can be divided into their lower bit counterparts. The rax register is 64 bits, eax is the lower 32 bits of rax, and ax is the lower 16 bits.

rax, rbx, rcx, rdx, rsi, rdi, rsp, rbp
: General Purpose registers.

rax, eax, ax, ah, al
: Return values / Accumulator.

rbx, ebx, bx, bh, bl
: Pointer to data / base index.

rcx, ecx, cx, ch, cl
: Counter.

rdx, edx, dx, dh, dl
: Extend accumulator / I/O operations.

rsi, esi, si
: High-speed memory (source index).

rdi, edi, di
High-speed memory (destination index).

r8, r9, r10, r11, r12, r13, r14, r15
: 64-bit registers.

rsp, rbp, rip
: Special purpose registers.

rsp, esp, sp
: Stack pointer.

rbp, ebp, bp
: Base / Frame pointer.

rip, eip, ip.
: Instruction pointer.


INSTRUCTIONS
------------

Stack Instructions: `push`, `pop`, `call`, `ret`. The `push` instruction decrements the rsp by 8 (on 64-bit machines) and then pushes the rbp onto the stack. The `pop` instruction pops the value of the variable off of the stack and then increments the rsp. The `call` function pushes the next instruction address and jumps to a function. The `ret` function pops the return program counter and jumps.
```
push	rbp
pop	rbp
call	func
ret
```

Integer ALU instructions: `add`, `sub`, `imul`, `mul`, `idiv`, `div`. In the `mul` instruction rax is multiplied by the specified register. The low bits of `mul` are placed in rax and the overflow bits are placed in rdx. The `div` instruction divides rax by the specified register. It sets rax to the ratio and rdx to the remainder. The instruction `mov rdx, 0` should be performed before a division to avoid errors.
```
add	rax, 4
add	rax, rdx
mul	rdx
div	rcx
```

Increment and decrement instructions: `inc`, `dec`.
```
inc	rax
dec	rax
```

Logical instructions: `and`, `or`, `xor`, `neg`, `not`.
```
xor	rax, rax
```

Bitwise arithmetic: `sal` / `sar`, `shl` / `shr`, `rcl` / `rcr`, `rol` / `ror`. If the second value of `shr` is not an immediate, then the first register is shifted by the amount in the rcx register.
```
shr	rax, cl
shr	rax, 4
```

Floating point instructions: `faddp`, `fsubr`, `fdivr`.

Data manipulation instructions: `mov`, `xchg`, `push`, `pop`. Square brackets "[]" signal the `mov` instruction to dereference the memory address specified inside the brackets.
```
mov	rax, 4
mov	rax, rdx
mov	rax, [124]
mov	rax, [rdi]
mov 	rax, [rdi + 4]
mov	rax, [rdi + rcx]
```

Load memory address: `lea`. The `lea` instruction is the only instruction that loads a memory address rather than the actual value.
```
lea	rdi, [rax]
lea	rdi, [rax + 4]
lea	rdi, [rax + data]
```

String manipulation instructions: `lods`, `stos`, `movs`, `scas`, `cmps`.

Program flow: `call`, `ret`, `int`, `iret`, `cmp`. The result of a `cmp` instruction is placed inside the rax register.
```
cmp	rax, 10
jl	loop
```

Jumps: `jmp`, `jle` (<=), `je` (==), `jge` (>=), `jg` (>), `jne` (!=), `jo` (if overflow), `ja` (if above), `jz` (if zero), `jnz` (if non-zero).
```
jmp	label
jnz	main
```

Input / Output instructions: `in`, `out`.

Do-nothing instructions: `nop`.



CALLING CONVENTION
------------------

The cdecl calling convention pushes arguments onto the stack from right to left. Before entering a function, the base pointer is pushed and the new base pointer is set by moving rsp into rbp.
```
caller:
	# Save previous base pointer and set new base pointer
	push	ebp
	mov	ebp, esp

	# Push function arguments in reverse order
	push	3
	push	2
	push	1
	call	callee

	mov	esp, ebp
	pop	ebp
	ret
```


EXAMPLE
-------

Hello World program:
```
.intel_syntax noprefix

	.text
	.globl 	_main
_main:
	push	rbp
	mov	rbp, rsp

	lea	rdi, [rip + _hello]
	call	_printf

	pop	rbp
	mov	rax, 0
	ret

	.data
_hello:
	.asciz	"Hello World\n"
```
