---
layout: post
title: Go
date: 2020-06-04
categories: [man]
tags: [language, imperative]
author: "Max Kossek"
description: Reference for the Go programming language.
sitemap:
    lastmod: 2020-06-04
---

NAME
----

Go -- Statically typed, compiled programming language with a focus on simplicity and concurrency.


DESCRIPTION
-----------

The `run` command compiles and runs a Go program in one step. The `build` command compiles the source file into a binary that can be executed later. The `clean` command removes all binary output files from a directory.
```
$ go run hello.go

$ go build hello.go
$ ./hello

$ go clean -i
```

The `test` command runs tests on the specified packages. The `install` command compiles and install packages and dependencies. The `get` command adds and installs dependencies.
```
$ go test file

$ go install pkg

$ go get golang.org/x/net
```

The `doc` command prints the documentation for a function or construct. The `fmt` command automatically formats a Go source file.
```
$ go doc fmt.Printf

$ go fmt file.go
```



PACKAGES
--------

All Go programs consist of packages. A package is a collection of source files in the same directory that are compiled together. Functions, types, variables, and constants defined in one source file are visible to all other source files in the same package. Each package serves as a separate name space for its declarations. Names have to be qualified with the name of their package: `package.FuncOrVarName`.

A module is a collection of related Go packages.

Every Go program starts executing in the `main` package. The "import" keyword is used to import functions from a package. Multiple packages can be imported by enclosing them in parentheses. To create a local alias use the syntax: `alias "package/path"`.
```
package main

import (
	"fmt"
	mr "math/rand"
	"os"
)
```

Inside a package, only the functions with capitalized names are exported. A function that begins with a lowercase letter is not exported.



INPUT / OUTPUT
--------------

`Print()` and `Println()` are the standard output functions defined in the `fmt` package.
```
fmt.Print("Hello world")
fmt.Println(a, b)
```

The `Printf()` function is similar to the `printf()` C function. The `Printf()` function supports the following conversion characters:
```
fmt.Printf("Type: %T, Value: %v\n", x)
```

`%c`
: Rune (Unicode code point).

`%d`
: Integer in decimal notation.

`%f`, `%g`, `%e`
: Floating-point number. All three allow you to control the displayed field width and numeric precision, such as `%8.3f`.

`%s`, `%q`
: String and quoted-string.

`%t`
: Boolean: `true` or `false`.

`%T`
: Type of a variable.

`%v`
: Value in natural format. For structs: `%+v` annotates the values with field names, and `%#v` prints the struct values in full Go syntax.

`%x`, `%o`, `%b`
: Hexadecimal, octal, binary.


The `Fprint()` family of functions print their outputs to a specified file stream.
```
fmt.Fprint(file, "Writing to file\n")
fmt.Fprintln(os.Stdout, "Writing to standard output")
fmt.Fprintf(os.Stderr, "Err: %v\n", err)
```

The `type Scanner` in the `bufio` package allows you to read input. The `bufio.ScanWords` function splits up the input into space separated words.
```
scanner := bufio.NewScanner(os.Stdin)
scanner.Split(bufio.ScanWords)
for scanner.Scan() {
	fmt.Println(scanner.Text())
}
if err := scanner.Err(); err != nil {
	fmt.Fprintln(os.Stderr, "reading standard input:", err)
}
```



OPERATORS
---------

Math operators: +, -, *, /, %.
```
x = y + 5
```

Assignment and incrementing / decrementing operators: +=, -=, *=, /=, ++, --. Note that using postfix and assignment is illegal (e.g. --x or y = x++).
```
x += 1
x++
```

Relational operators: ==, !=, <, >, <=, >=.

Logical operators: &&, ||, !.

Bitwise operators: & (AND), &^ (AND NOT), | (OR), ^ (XOR), << (left shift), >> (right shift).

String operators: + (concatenation).



VARIABLES
---------

Variables are declared using the "var" keyword followed by the variable name and an optional data type: `var name type = expression`. Either the `type` or the `expression` can be ommited, but not both.
```
var i int = 5
var u uint

var b byte = 'a'

var b1, b2, b3 bool

var a1 [10]int
```

A `var` declaration can include initializers. Go supports type inference. This means that if there is an initalizer, then the type of a variable does not need to be declared as long as it can be inferred from the right hand side value. Numeric types are initialized to `0`, strings to `""`, boolean types to `false`, and interfaces and reference types to `nil`. This ensures that values can't be left uninitialized and they default to a useful state.
```
var i1, i2 int = 1, 2
var b, f, s = true, 3.14, "no!"
var userName string
var f, err = os.Open(name)
```

A `var` statement can be used at both the package and at the function level. The initialization of a variable can be an expression computed at run time.
```
var (
	home	= os.Getenv("HOME")
	user	= os.Getenv("USER")
	gopath	= os.Getenv("GOPATH")
)
```

The ":=" operator signifies a short variable declaration of the form: `name := expression`. This operator can only be used inside functions to initialize local variables. Unless a specific data type is required, most local variables should be declared using this form. The ":=" operator does not necessarily declare all the variable names on the left-hand side. It simply acts as an assignment statement if one of the variable names was already defined.
```
func main() {
	i := 7
	f := 3.14
	c := 5 + 3i

	b, s := true, "hello"

	arr := [...]int{1, 2, 3}
	slc := []string{"gold", "silver", "bronze"}

	file, err := os.Open(name)
}
```

A constant is an unchanging value guaranteed to be evaluated at compile time, not at run time. Using constants allows for compiler optimization and detection of errors during compilation (such as a division by zero or an out of bounds index access).

Constants are declared using the "const" keyword. A constant must be either be a number, character, string, or boolean. Constants can appear at the package or at the function level, and hence cannot be declared using the ":=" syntax.
```
const (
	KB = 1e3
	MB = 1e6
	GB = 1e9
	TB = 1e12

	maxSize	 = 100
	fileName = "filename"
)

const Pi = 3.14
const Greeting = "Hello World"
```

Enumerated constants can be created using the `iota` enumerator. The value of `iota` begins at zero and increments by one for each item in the sequence.
```
const (
	_ = iota
	KiB = 1 << (10 * iota)
	MiB
	GiB
	TiB
)

type Weekday int
const (
	Sunday Weekday = iota Monday
	Tuesday
	Wednesday
	Thursday
	Friday
	Saturday
)
```



DATA TYPES
----------

Go's basic types are:

- `bool`
- `string`
- `int`, `int8`, `int16`, `int32`, int64`
- `uint`, `uint8`, `uint16`, `uint32`, `uint64`
- `uintptr`
- `byte` (Synonym for `uint8`)
- `rune` (Unicode code point, synonym for `int32`)
- `float32`, `float64`
- `complex64`, `complex128`

The size of `int` and `uint` defaults to 32 or 64 bits depending on your system. Use the default `int` unless you have a specific reason to use a different sized integer.

A type declaration defines a new named type that has the same underlying type as an existing type. The "type" keyword creates a type declaration: `type name existing-type`. Type declarations usually occur at the package level, with a type whose name is exported.
```
type Point struct {
	X, Y int
}

var p Point
```

Type conversions have to be done explicitly. The expression `T(v)` converts the value `v` to type `T`. Two values of different types can not be compared or assigned to each other, even if they have the same underlying type.
```
var i int = 42
var f float64 = float64(i)
var u uint = uint(f)
```

Type assertions are performed by enclosing the data type in parenthesis.
```
var i interface{} = "hello"
s, ok := i.(string)
f, ok := i.(float64)
```



STRINGS
-------

Go strings are immutable. There are no operations to modify a string in place. This makes it safe for two variables to point to the same string in memory. A new string is created whenever an existing string is modified.

There are multiple ways to initialize a string: short declaration, default initialization and explicit initialization. The first two forms below are preferred.
```
s := ""
var s string
var s = ""
var s string = ""
```

The "+" operator concatenates two strings.
```
"hello" + " world"
```

The substring operation has the form `s[i:j]` and returns the bytes starting at `i` and up to `j`. If omitted, `i` defaults to 0, and `j` to `len(s)`.
```
s := "hello world"[0:5]
sameString = s[:]
```



POINTERS
--------

A pointer holds the memory address of a value. Go has the same dereferencing and memory address operators as C: "&" signals the address and "*" denotes the pointer's value (dereferencing). The type `*T` is a pointer to a `T` value. Unlike C, Go has no pointer arithmetic.
```
var p *int
i := 42
p = &i			// p (type *int) points to i
fmt.Println(*p)		// "42"
*p = 21			// equivalent to i = 21
fmt.Println(i)		// "21"
```

The zero value of a pointer is `nil`. The test `p != nil` is true if `p` points to a variable. Two pointers are equal if they point to the same variable.
```
var x, y int
fmt.Println(&x == &x)	// "true"
fmt.Println(&x == &y)	// "false"
fmt.Println(&x == nil)	// "false"
```



STRUCTS
-------

A `struct` consists of zero or more related values that can be of different types. Structures are declared using the "struct" keyword. Each field in a `struct` has a name, a type, and a tag. The dot (".") operator is used to access fields inside a struct: `structName.FieldName`. The value of a struct field can be changed using the pointer notation: `(*structName).FieldName`.
```
type Vertex struct {
	X int
	Y int
}

v := Vertex{1, 2}
v.X = 4

v := Vertex{1, 2}
p := &v
p.X = 1e9
(*p).Y = 10
fmt.Println(v)
```

A `struct` is only exported if its name begins with a capital letter. You must use a pointer type `*S` to use a `struct` field recursively.
```
type Employee struct {
	ID	int
	Name	string
	DoB	time.Time
	Salary	int
}

type tree struct {
	value		int
	left, right	*tree
}
```

The field order of a `struct` affects its type identity, unless fields names are provided.
```
anim := gif.GIF{LoopCount: nframes}
```

Structs can be passed to and from functions. Large `struct`'s should be passed as pointers for efficiency.

If all of the fields of a `struct` are comparable, then the entire `struct` can be compared using the `==` and `!=` equality operators. Comparable structs can be used as keys for the `map` type.

Anonymous fields allow you to embed nested structs without having to access them through a long chain of dot (".") operators.
```
type Point struct {
	x, y int
}

type Circle struct {
	Point
	Radius int
}

type Wheel struct {
	Circle
	Spokes int
}

var w wheel
w.X = 8		// Same as w.Circle.Point.X = 8
w.Y = 8		// Same as w.Circle.Point.Y = 8
w.Radius = 5	// Same as w.Circle.Radius = 5
w.Spokes = 20

x = Wheel{Circle{Point{3, 3}, 4}, 8}
```



ARRAYS
------

Arrays have a fixed size and must contain elements of the same type. An array has the form `[n]T`, where `n` is the number of elements and `T` is the type of the elements. For example, `var a [10]int` declares an array of 10 integers.
```
var a [2]string
a[0] = "Hello"
a[1] = "World"

for i, v := range a {
	fmt.Printf("%d %s\n", i, v)
}
```

An array literal allows you to initialize an array with a list of values different from the default value of the type. Writing ellipsis ("...") makes Go determine the length of the array literal based on the initializer.
```
a := [...]int{1, 2, 3}
var b [3]int = [3]int{1, 2, 3}

var c [3]int = [3]int{1, 2}
c[2] = 3;

var d := [32]byte{}
var e := [...]int{99: -1}
```

Go arrays are values. This means that you can assign one array to another array, and all the elements will be copied. An array is passed to a function as a copy, not as a pointer.
```
func main() {
	var x, y [10] int
	x[5] = 10
	y = x
	fmt.Println("%v\n", y[5])
}
```

Multidimensional arrays are created as arrays-of-arrays or slices-of-slices. Each element in the multi-dimensional array can have a variable length.
```
type Transform [3][3]float64
type LinesOfText [][]byte

text := LinesOfText{
	[]byte("Hello"),
	[]byte("World"),
	[]byte("!"),
}
```



SLICES
------

Slices are a dynamically-sized view into the elements of an array. In practice, slices are much more commonly used than arrays. The type `[]T` is a slice with elements of type `T`. Slices can contain any type, including other slices.
```
primes := [6]int{2, 3, 5, 7, 11, 13}
var s[] int = primes[1:4]

board := [][]string{
	[]string{"_", "_", "_"},
	[]string{"_", "_", "_"},
	[]string{"_", "_", "_"},
}
board[0][0] = "X"
board[2][2] = "O"
```

A slice is a reference to an array. Hence, changing the elements of a slice modifies the corresponding elements of its underlying array. Any changes to a slices value inside a function will be visible outside of the function. If you assign one slice to another, then they will both point to the same array.
```
var slc := []int{1, 2, 3}
slc_cpy := slc
slc_cpy[0] = 0
```

A slice is formed by specifying two indices: a low and a high bound, separated by a colon: `a[low : high]`. This is a half-open range, including the first element, but excluding the last one. The default for the low bound is zero, and the default for the high bound is the length of the slice.
```
var a [10] int
a[0:10]
a[:10]
a[0:]
a[:]
```

The `make()` function creates a dynamically-sized array by allocating a zeroed array and returning a slice referring to that array. Its signature has the form: `func make(t Type, size ... IntegerType) Type`. The first parameter specifies the array's type, the second its length, and the third optional argument the capacity.
```
var length int = 5
var capacity int = 10

a := make([]int, length)
b := make([]int, 0, capacity)
c := make([]byte, 3)
```

A slice literal is like an array literal without a length.
```
q := []int{2, 3, 5, 7}
r := []bool{true, true, false}

s := []struct {
	i int
	b bool
}{
	{2, true},
	{3, false},
}
```

Slices have two properties: `len` (length of the slice), and `cap` (the number of elements in the array past the first slice element). You can obtain the length and capacity of a slice using `len(s)` and `cap(s)`. The `len` of a slice can be changed as long as it fits within the bounds of the underlying array (within `cap`). The nil slice has len = 0, cap = 0.
```
slc := make([]int, 3, 10)

fmt.Println("%v", slc)		// Prints "[0 0 0]".
fmt.Println("%d", len(slc))	// Prints "3".
fmt.Println("%d", cap(slc))	// Prints "10".

var s[]int
s == nil			// len(s) == 0 and cap(s) == 0
```

The `append()` function appends elements to a slice. Its signature has the form: `func append(slice []Type, elems ...Type) []Type`. The first parameter is a slice of type `Type`, and the rest of the parameters are `Type` values to append to the slice. It returns the slice containing all of the elements appended. If the array of `slice` is too small, then Go will automatically allocate a bigger array.
```
var s []int
s = append(s, 0)		// s = [0]
s = append(s, 1, 2, 3, 4)	// s = [0, 1, 2, 3, 4]

x := []int{1, 2}
y := []int{3, 4}
x = append(x, y...)		// x = [1, 2, 3, 4]
x = append(x, []int{5, 6}...)	// x = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]
```



MAPS
----

A `map` holds a set of key/value pairs and provides constant-time store, retrieve and test operations. A map is written as `map[K]V`, where `K` and `V` are the types of the keys and values respectively. The type of the key of a map has to support the comparison operator "==" (integers, floating point, string, pointers, interfaces, structs, arrays, but not slices). The values of a map can be of any type.
```
var o = map[string]int{
	"A": 1,
	"B": 2,
	"C": 3,
}

var x := make(map[int]bool)
x[1] = true
x[2] = false
```

The built-in function `make()` creates a new reference to an empty map. Maps are passed to functions as references, which means that any changes made by a function will be visible to the caller as well.
```
m = make(map[string]Vertex)
m["Bell Labs"] = Vertex{
	40.68433, -74.39967,
}
fmt.Println(m["Bell Labs"])
```

The zero value of a map is `nil` and a `len` of 0. Accessing a map element always returns a value. If the key exists in the map then the value is returned, else the default value of the map's values is returned (e.g. 0, "").

The syntax for accessing and modifying map elements is the same as for arrays, except that the index doesn't have to be an integer. To insert or update an element in the map: `m[key] = elem`. To retrieve an element: `elem = m[key]`. To delete an element: `delete(m, key)`. To test if a key is present with a two-value assignment: `elem, ok := m[key]`. If `key` is in `m`, then `ok` is true, else it is false.
```
m = map[byte]int {
	'a':	1,
	'b':	2,
	'c':	3,
}

x = m['a']
delete(m, 'a')

y, ok := m['a']
if !ok {
	fmt.Println("Element 'a' not in map")
}
```

The `range` operator loops over the keys of a map in a `for` loop.
```
for k, v := range m {
	fmt.Printf("Key: %s\tValue: %d\n", k, v)
}
```




FUNCTIONS
---------

The "func" keyword declares a function. Functions have the form: `func name(parameter-list) (result-list) { body }`. All of the following functions have the same signature: two `int` parameters and one `int` return value.
```
func add(x int, y int) int	{ return x + y }
func sub(x, y int) (z int)	{ z = x - y; return }
func first(x int, _ int) int	{ return x }
func zero(int, int) int		{ return 0 }
```

The data types of the return value and parameters comes after the variable name. You can omit the type if multiple parameters share the same type: `func f(x, y int, i, j, k string)`. A function continues execution until it reaches the end the function or a `return` statement. A function can return none, one, or multiple results. Use parenthesis to return multiple values. The function's return values can (and should) be named.
```
func split(sum int) (x, y int) {
	x = sum * 4 / 9
	y = sum - x
	return
}

func mathOp(x, y int) (sum, diff int) {
	return x + y, x - y
}

func retPtr() (p *int) {
	iptr := 3
	return &iptr
}

func read(r Reader, buf []byte) (n int, err error) {
	for len(buf) > 0 && err == nil {
		var nr int
		nr, err = r.Read(buf)
		n += nr
		buf = buf[nr:]
	}
	return
}

func printSlice(s string, x[]int) {
	fmt.Printf("%s len=%d cap=%d %v\n", s, len(x), cap(x), x)
}
```

Functions can have a variable number of parameters. To declare a variadic parameter use the syntax: `parName ...type`.
```
func loopArgs(argv ...int) {
	for i, v := range argv {
		fmt.Printf("%v=%v ", i, v)
	}
}

func main() {
	loopArgs(1)		// Prints "0=1 "
	loopArgs(1, 2, 3)	// Prints "0=1 1=2 2=3 "
}
```

The "defer" keyword signifies Go to delay execution until the surrounding function returns. Deferred function calls are pushed onto the stack, and later executed in a last-in-first-out order. The "defer" keyword is most often used for unlocking a mutex or closing a file.
```
defer fmt.Println("world")
fmt.Println("hello")

func Contents(filename string) (string, error) {
	f, err := os.Open(filename)
	if err != nil {
		return "", err
	}
	defer f.close()
	...

	return string(result), nil
}
```

Functions can be called recursively. They can also be used as arguments and return values for other functions.

Function literals are closures. A variable has to be declared before it can be used inside a function literal.
```
var i

isNeg := func() bool {
	return i < 0
}

i = -2
b := isNeg()	// b = true
i = 5
b = isNeg()	// b = false
```

A function without a function body indicates that the function was implemented in a language other than Go (e.g. C, Assembly).
```
package Math
func Sin(x float64) float64
```




METHODS
-------

A method is a function associated with a named type. Methods have a special receiver argument written between `func` and the function's name. You can only declare a method for a receiver whose type is defined in the same package as the method.
```
type MyFloat float64

func (f MyFloat) Abs() float64 {
	if f < 0 {
		return float64(-f)
	}
	return float64(f)
}

func main() {
	f := MyFloat(-math.Sqrt2)
	fmt.Println(f.Abs())
}
```

Methods can be declared with pointer receivers. Pointers receivers are more commonly used than value receivers. Having a pointer receiver type `*T` allows you to modify the value to which the receiver points. It also allows you to avoid copying the value on each method call. Contrary to functions, methods automatically convert a variable to its address if the method takes in a pointer receiver.
```
type Vertex struct {
	X, Y float64
}

func (v Vertex) Abs() float64 {
	return math.Sqrt(v.X*v.X + v.Y*v.Y)
}

func (v *Vertex) Scale(f float64) {
	v.X = v.X * f
	v.Y = v.Y * f
}

func main() {
	v := Vertex{3, 4}
	v.Scale(10)
	fmt.Println(v.Abs())
}
```



INTERFACES
----------

An interface specifies a set of method signatures. A value of interface type can hold any value that implements those methods. Interface values can be thought of as the concrete type: `(value, type)`. The type implements the interface implicitly.
```
type Stringer interface {
	String() string
}

type Vertex struct{ X, Y float64 }
func (v *Vertex) String() string { return fmt.Sprintf("[%v, %v]", v.X, v.Y) }

type Year int
func (y Year) String() string { return fmt.Sprintf("Year = %d", y) }

func main() {
	v := Vertex{3, 4}
	var s Stringer = v
	fmt.Println(v.String())		// Prints "[3, 4]"
	fmt.Println(v)			// Prints "[3, 4]"
	fmt.Println(s)			// Prints "[3, 4]"

	var y Year
	y = 1900
	fmt.Println(y.String())		// Prints "Year = 1900"
}
```

Empty interfaces implement no methods, and can hold values of any type.
```
var i interface{}
i = 42
i = "hello"
```

A type assertion provides access to an interface value's underlying concrete value. For example, `t := i.(T)` asserts that the interface value `i` has type `T`, and assigns the value of `i` to the variable `t`. If `i` does not hold a value of type `T`, then the statement triggers a panic.
```
var i interface{} = "hello"

s, ok := i.(string)
f, ok := i.(float64)
f = i.(float64)		// panic
```

A type switch allows you to easily write a number of type assertions.
```
func do(i interface{}) {
	switch v := i.(type) {
	case int:
		fmt.Printf("Twice %v is %v\n", v, v*2)
	case string:
		fmt.Printf("%q is %v bytes long\n", v, len(v))
	default:
		fmt.Printf("I don't know about type %T!\n", v)
	}
}

func main() {
	do(21)
	do("hello")
	do(true)
}
```



COMMON INTERFACES
-----------------

The `Stringer` interface is used by the `fmt` package to print values.
```
type Stringer interface {
	String() string
}

func (p Person) String() string {
	return fmt.Sprintf("%v (%v years)", p.Name, p.Age)
}

func main() {
	a := Person{"Arthur Dent", 42}
	z := Person{"Zaphod Beeblebrox", 9001}
	fmt.Println(a, z)
}
```

An `error` value expresses a Go programs error state. A nil `error` denotes succes, while a non-nil `error` denotes failure.
```
type error interface {
	Error() string
}
```

The `Reader` interface is used by the `io` package to read streams of data.
```
func (T) Read(b []byte) (n int, err error)
```



CONDITIONALS
------------

Go's "if" statement has a similar syntax to C. The parentheses around a condition statement are optional. Go allows you to declare local variables inside the conditional check statement. Variables declared by the statement are only in scope until the end of the "if" statement.
```
if x < 0 {
	y = -1
} else if v := math.Pow(x, n); v < lim {
	return v
} else {
	return -v
}
```

A "switch" statement compares a single value against a number of alternatives. Go's "switch" statement does not require a break statement (the "fallthrough" statement can override this behavior, but it is rarely used). The "switch" statement runs the first case whose value is equal to the condition expression, and then stops checking the other conditions. Go provides a "break" statement, but it is mostly used for breaking out of surrounding loops, not "switch" statements.
```
switch c := x; c {
case '0' <= c && c <= '9':
	return c - '0'
case 'a' <= c && c <= 'z':
	return c - 'a'
case ' ', '?', '&':
	return '+'
default:
	return c
```

A "switch" statement without a condition is called a tagless switch and is equivalent to `switch true`. Tagless switches allow you to write long if-else chains in a more compact way. This is considereed idiomatic In Go.
```
switch {
case t.Hour() < 12:
	fmt.Println("Good morning!")
default:
	fmt.Println("Good evening.")
}
```

A type switch can be used to determine the dynamic type of an interface variable.
```
switch t := t.(type) {
default:
	fmt.Printf("unexpected type %T\n", t)
case bool:
	fmt.Printf("boolean %t\n", t)
case int:
	fmt.Printf("integer %d\n", t)
case *int:
	fmt.Printf("pointer to integer %d\n", *t)
}
```



LOOPS
-----

The "for" loop is the only looping construct in Go. A Go for loop does not need to be surrounded by parentheses "()", but braces "{}" are required. A for loop consists of three components: init (executed before the first iteration), condition (evaluated before every iteration), and post (executed after every iteration). All three of these statements can be omitted. By omitting the initialization and post statements, the for loop can be made to act as a while loop. Omitting all statements creates an infinite loop.
```
// For loop
for i := 0; i < 10; i++ {
	sum += i
}

// While loop
for sum < 100 {
	sum += sum
}

// Infinite loop
for {
	sum += sum
}
```

The "range" form of a for loop iterates over the elements in a slice or map. The first variable is assigned to the index and the second to the elements value. A blank identifier "_" can be set for the index, and the value variable can be omitted.
```
var n = []int{3, 5, 7, 11, 13}
for i, v := range n {
	fmt.Printf("Index = %d, Value = %d\n", i, v)
}

for i := range n {
	fmt.Printf("Index = %d\n", i)
}

for _, v := range n {
	fmt.Printf("Value = %d\n", v)
}

for _, v := range []int{1, 2, 3} {
	fmt.Printf("Value = %d\n", v)
}
```



MEMORY MANAGEMENT
-----------------

The built-in function `new(T)` allocates zeroed memory for a new item of type `T`, and returns its address, a value of type `*T`. Each call to `new` returns a distinct variable with a unique address. The data type/structure defines what zero value the variable is initialized with.
```
p := new(int)
*p = 2
```

The built-in function `make(T, args)` returns an initalized (not zeroed) value of type T (not `*T`) for slices, maps, and channels only. Calling `make()` does not return a pointer, while calling `new()` does.
```
make([]int, 10, 100)
```

Addresses of local variables inside a function can be returned, since the storage associated with the variable survives after a call to `return`. If a structure contains no field, then `new(Type)` and `&Type{}` are equivalent.
```
func NewFile(fd int, name string) *File {
	return &File{fd :fd, name: name}
}
```



CONCURRENCY
-----------

A goroutine is lightweight thread managed by the Go runtime. Only one goroutine has access to a value at any given time.

The "go" keyword invokes a new goroutine. Calling `go f(x, y, z)` means that the values `f`, `x`, `y`, and `z` are evaluated in the current goroutine, and that those values are then passed for execution of `f` to a new goroutine. Goroutines run in the same address space.
```
go say("world")
say("hello")
```

A channel is a communication mechanism that allows a goroutine to pass messages to other goroutines. Channels are allocated with `make()`. Channels are used with the "<-" channel operator. By default, sends and receives block until the other side is ready. Adding a second argument to `make` allows you to create a buffered channel.
```
cs := make(chan *os.File)

ch := make(chan int, 2)
ch <- 1
ch <- 2
```

Values can be passed to a channel from within a function.
```
func sendChan(i int, ch chan int) {
	ch <- i + 1
}

func main () {
	ch := make(chan int)
	go sendChan(0, ch)
	go sendChan(1, ch)
	go sendChan(3, ch)

	// Prints all received values (e.g. "4 1 2")
	fmt.Println(<-ch, <-ch, <-ch)
}
```

A sender can use the `close()` function to indicate that no more values will be sent. Receivers can test whether a channel is closed by assigning a second parameter to a receive expression: `v, ok := <- ch`. The `ok` value is false if there ae no more values to receive. Only the sender should close a channel, never the receiver. Using `close()` is only necessary when the receiver must be told that there are no more values coming, such as to terminate a loop.

The `select` statement allows a goroutine to specify what communication operations it wants to wait for. A `select` blcoks until one of its cases can run, then it executes the case. If multiple are ready, then it chooses one at random.
```
select {
case c <- x:
	x, y = y, x+y
case <- quit:
	fmt.Println("quit")
	return
}
```



ERRORS
------

Errors have type `error`. Most library routines return an error indicator as the second return value to the caller. It is good practice to use the shorthand variable assignment form for error handling.
```
type error interface {
	Error() string
}

file, err == os.Create(filename)
if err != nil {
	log.Fatalf("File creation failed: %s", err)
}

if err := r.ParseForm(); err != nil {
	log.Print(err)
}
```

Many library routines also return an "ok" value as their second return value. This value indicates whether an operation was successful.
```
var in interface{} = "hello"
if s, ok := in.(string); !ok {
	fmt.Println("Not a string")
} else {
	fmt.Printf("%v\n", s)
}

m := map[string]int{"a": 1, "b": 2}
if y, ok := m["c"]; !ok {
	fmt.Println("Not in map")
} else {
	fmt.Println("Is in map: %v", y)
}
```

The built-in function `panic()` is used for errors that are unrecoverable. Calling `panic()` creates a run-time error that stops the program. It takes a single argument that is the string to be printed to `Stderr`. Most functions should try to avoid `panic()` and return `error` as an extra return value.
```
panic("no value for $USER")

panic(fmt.Sprintf("Unsafe value passed: %g", x))
```

The `recover()` function can be used to stop `panic()` from killing the entire program. Calling `recover()` stops the unwinding of the stack and returns the arguments passed to `panic()`. However, this is only possible inside a deferred function.



STYLE CONVENTIONS
-----------------

Multi-line and single line comments are written like in C (`/* ... */` and `//`). It is good style to write a comment specifying the function's behavior before each function definition. Function comments should start with the function's name to make them easier to `grep` and for `godoc` to locate.
```
// Printf formats according to a format specifier and writes to standard output.
// It returns the number of bytes written and any write error encountered.
func Printf(format string, a ...interface{}) (n int, err error) {
	return Fprintf(os.Stdout, format, a...)
}
```

For naming, prefer shorter names and use `camelCase` not underscores. Functions and variables that have a large scope can have longer names, while indexes should have short names, such as `i`.



TESTING
-------

Go allows for easy testing using the `go test` command and the `testing` package. Tests wre written in a file ending in "\_test.go".
```
$ vim $GOPATH/src/github.com/user/stringutil/reverse_test.go
$ go test github.com/user/stringutil
```


STANDARD LIBRARY
----------------

`bufio`
: Buffered IO: `NewScanner`, `Scan`, `Text`.

`bytes`
: Functions for manipulating bytes. Types: `Buffer`. Functions: `Contains`, `Count`, `Field`, `HasPrefix`, `HasSuffix`, `Index`, `Join`.

`encoding`
: Functions for converting data between representations. Subdirectories: `encoding/base64`, `encoding/binary`, `encoding/csv`, `encoding/hex`, `encoding/json`, `encoding/xml`.

`flag`
: Command-line argument handling: `Bool`, `Parse`, `String`.

`fmt`
: Functions for file input and output: `Fprintf`, `Print`, `Println`, `Printf`, `Sprintf`.

`io`
: Input and output related functions: `Copy`. Interfaces: `Writer`, `Reader`.

`io/util`
: Input and output utility functions. Variables: `Discard`. Functions: `ReadAll`, `ReadDir`, `ReadDir`, `TempDir`, `TempFile`, `WriteFile`.

`log`
: Logging: `Fatal`, `Fatalf`, `Panic`, `Print`, `Printf`.

`math`
: Math functions. Constants: `E`, `Ln2`, `Ln10`, `NaN`, `Pi`, `SqrtE`. Functions: `Abs`, `Ceil`, `Cos`, `IsInf`, `IsNaN`, `Log`, `Log10`, `Log2`, `Max`, `Min`, `Sin`, `Sqrt`.

`net`
: Network related functions.

`net/http`
: HTTP web protocol functions: `Get`, `HandleFunc`, `ListenAndServe`. Types: `Request`, `ResponseWriter`.

`os`
: Operating system related functionality: `Exit`, `Getenv`, `Getwd`. Variables: `Args`, `Stdin`, `Stdout`, `Stderr`. Functions for type `File`: `Create`, `Open`, `Read`, `Write`.

`sort`
: Sorting functions: `Strings`.

`strconv`
: String and numeric conversion functions: `Atoi`, `FormatInt`, `FormatUint`, `Itoa`, `ParseBool`, `ParseFloat`, `ParseInt`, `ParseUint`.

`strings`
: String related functions: `Contains`, `Count`, `Field`, `HasPrefix`, `HasSuffix`, `Index`, `Join`.

`sync`
: Synchronization. Variables: `Mutex`. Functions: `Lock`, `Unlock`.

`template`
: Templates for generating text output from input data. Functions: `HTMLEscape`, `JSEscape`.

`unicode`
: Functions for working with runes: `IsDigit`, `IsLetter`, `IsLower`, `IsUpper`.



References: [^donovan] [^google]

[^donovan]: Donovan, A. A., & Kernighan, B. W. (2015). The Go programming language. Addison-Wesley Professional.

[^google]: Google (2020). Effective Go.
